2 samples were removed due to failed quality control, and BMIQ normalization was done with 11 preterm and 11 term samples.
A DNA quality check was performed with Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA reagent.
After seven days, CD34+ and CD34- fractions were again separated as described above.
All mothers were healthy with no cardiovascular risk factors, except for the associated risks among those mothers who smoked.
A weighed amount of pulverized umbilical cord tissue was lysed and homogenised via Hyaluronidase solution treatment, addition of TNES lysis buffer and Proteinase K.
A weighed amount of pulverized umbilical cord tissue was lysed and homogenised via Hyaluronidase solution treatment, additionof TNES lysis buffer and Proteinase K.
CD34+ cells were isolated from fresh umbilical cord blood after written consent according to the guidelines specifically approved by the Ethic Committee of RWTH Aachen University (Permit Number: EK187/08) using  the CD34 Micro Bead Kit on a MiniMACS system (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany).
Cells able to form bone through endochondral ossification and attract bone marrow in an innovative in vivo model were compared to cells lacking these capacities.
Cells were cultured in StemSpan serum free expansion medium (Stem Cell Technologies, Grenoble, France) supplemented with 10 µg/mL heparin (ratiopharm, GmbH, Ulm, Germany), 20 ng/mL thrombopoietin (TPO; PeproTech GmbH, Hamburg, Germany), 10 ng/mL stem cell factor (SCF; PeproTech), 10 ng/mL fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1; PeproTech).
Comparing four commonly use MSC sources (bone marrow (BM), white adipose tissue (WAT), umbilical cord (UC) and skin) we found only bone marrow (BM)-derived MSCs capable of endochondral ossification and marrow attraction.
Culture was either performed on tissue culture plastic (TCP) or on a confluent layer of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs; passage 3 to 6).
Despite similarities in morphology, phenotype and in vitro behavior, Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (MSC) form various tissue sources show striking differences in their in vivo potential to form bone, cartilage and hematopoietic support tissue.
Despite similarities in morphology, phenotype and in vitro behavior, Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (MSC) form various tissue sources show striking differences in their in vivo potential to form bone, cartilage and hematopoietic support tissue.
Genome wide DNA methylation differences in umbilical cord blood  (UCB) of preterm and term born neonates.
Genomic DNA from Umbilical Cord Blood was isolated by Gentra Autopure LS98TM system (Gentra Systems).
Genomic DNA was extracted from venous umbilical cord blood with the RealPure kit (REALPURE, REAL, DURVIZ, Ref: RBMEG01) and was quantified with the Nanodrop-2000C Spectrophotometer.
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from umbilical cord blood.
Interestingly only BM-derived MSPCs were capable of bone formation and marrow attraction.
In this study, we have analyzed DNA methylation characteristics of human mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells (MSPCs) form different tissue sources including bone marrow (BM), white adipose tissue (WAT ), umbilical cord (UC) as well as dermal fibroblasts by using the HumanMethylation450K array.
Mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells (MSPCs) from human umbilical cord (UC).
Methods: Twenty mother-newborn dyads, after uncomplicated pregnancies, in the absence of perinatal illness were included.
preterm_umbilical cord blood DNA.
term_umbilical cord blood DNA.
The idiopathic preterm delivery methylation profile in umbilical cord blood.
The Illumina 450K Human DNA methylation Beadchip was used to obtain the DNA methylation profiles of 12 preterm and 12 term UCB samples  across 450,000 CpGs.
These features correlated with unique epigenetic characteristics potentially enabling BM-derived cells to undergo endochondral ossification.
tisse source for mscs: umbilical cord (UC).
tissue: Umbilical cord blood.
To gain mechanistic insights explaining this differences we analyzed gene expression characteristics of MSC from all four tissue sources using  Affymetrix Genechip Human Gene 2.0 ST Array.
To gain mechanistic insights explaining this differences we analyzed gene expression characteristics of MSC from all four tissue sources using  Affymetrix Genechip Human Gene 2.0 ST Array.
Twenty mother-newborn dyads, after uncomplicated pregnancies, in the absence of perinatal illness were included.
Umbilical cord blood (for methylation arrays) and maternal peripheral venous blood (for cotine level measurement) were collected and an epigenome-wide association study was performed using a 450K epigenome-wide scan (Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation 450BeadChip) with adjustment to normalize the DNA methylation for data cell variability in whole blood.
Umbilical cord blood was collected in EDTA-tubes, centrifuged to yield plasma, stored at -80ºC and thawed before use.
Umbilical cord blood were collected and an epigenome-wide association study was performed using a 450K epigenome-wide scan (Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation 450BeadChip) with adjustment to normalize the DNA methylation for data cell variability in whole blood.
