22561) supplemented with 20% FBS (PAA Laboratories), GlutaMAX, penicillin (100U/mL), and streptomycin (100 mg/mL) (all from Life Technologies) at 37C and 5% CO2.
About 85% of the cell population in this bone tissue are osteocytes and the remainder are osteoblasts, bone marrow, etc."
A core set of differentially methylated regions in APL was identified.
A detailed characterization of the mRNA- and microRNA transcriptomes during adipocyte differentiation also showed that the iMSC#3 recapitulates this process at the molecular level.
After informed consent, bone marrow specimens packed with leukemic blasts were obtained in each patient.
Age at diagnosis, Sanz score and Flt3-mutation status characterized methylation subtypes.
APL patients showed increased genome-wide DNA methylation with higher variability than healthy CD34+ cells, promyelocytes and remission bone marrow.
"A total of 231 pediatric patients with B-ALL were utilized from the California Childhood Cancer Study.
ATRA treatment of APL blasts did also not result in DNA methylation changes.
Bisulphite converted DNA from all samples were hybridised to the Illumina Infinium 450 Human Methylation arrays and for each analysis the drug treated sample was compared to the corresponding PBS control sample."
"Bone marrow biopsy, AraC"
"Bone marrow biopsy, DAC"
"Bone marrow biopsy, mock"
"Bone marrow cells collected from healthy donors were sorted and DNA extracted at Washington University in St. Louis, microarrays were then run at USC"
Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stroma cells (MSCs) have many of the properties of multipotent stem cells, and can be differentiated towards osteoblasts in vitro, making these cells a convenient tool for investigation of osteogenesis.
"bone marrow-derived MSC (iP-MSC)"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 00_751"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 01_1808"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 02_1505"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 02_1522"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 02_1550"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 02_723"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 03_106"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 03_1310"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 03_1380"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 04_126"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 04_6"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 05_1464"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 05_170"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 05_579"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 06_2096"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 06_518"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 06_758"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 07_1768"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 07_1962"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 07_2252"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 08_151"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 08_723"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 08_774"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 08_785"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 08_930"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 10_1420"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 10_1789"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 11_834"
"Bone marrow mononuclear cells, 12_254"
"bone marrow mononuclear cells, leukemia"
"Bone marrow MSC-derived iPS cells (iPSCs)"
"Bone marrow sample grown in cultutre"
By sequencing of immuno¬precipi¬tated chromatin we generated high resolution maps of enrichment of five histone H3 modifications associated with different functional states of chromatin, and identified differentiation-induced epigenetic changes.
By the same approach, several thousand binding sites for the transcription factor RUNX2 was mapped to around 1900 target genes in differentiated osteoblasts.
"cell description: neuroblastoma, BE-C is a clone of the SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cell line (see ATCC CRL-2271) that was established in November of 1972 from a bone marrow biopsy taken from a 2-year-old individual with disseminated neuroblastoma after repeated courses of chemotherapy and radiotherapy."
Cells able to form bone through endochondral ossification and attract bone marrow in an innovative in vivo model were compared to cells lacking these capacities.
"cells isolated from healthy bone marrow"
Cells were expanded in standard alpha-MEM supplemented with pooled human platelet lysate fully replacing fetal bovine serum.
Cells were passaged every 5-6 days enzymatically with dispase (1 g/ml, Stemcell Technologies).
"cell type: bone marrow mononuclear cells"
"cell type: normal bone marrow progenitor cells"
"CMP of normal bone marrow"
c-myc binding sites were associated with low methylation.
CN-AML blasts isolated from patient bone marrow aspriation were compared to CD34+ cell population from healthy donors by DNA methylation array and affymetrix gene expression microarray."
Comparing four commonly use MSC sources (bone marrow (BM), white adipose tissue (WAT), umbilical cord (UC) and skin) we found only bone marrow (BM)-derived MSCs capable of endochondral ossification and marrow attraction.
"Density centrifuged bone marrow"
"""Despite similarities in morphology, phenotype and in vitro behavior, Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (MSC) form various tissue sources show striking differences in their in vivo potential to form bone, cartilage and hematopoietic support tissue.
"Despite similarities in morphology, phenotype and in vitro behavior, Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (MSC) form various tissue sources show striking differences in their in vivo potential to form bone, cartilage and hematopoietic support tissue.
"disease state: normal bone marrow"
DNA methylation (DNAm) profiles of iPSCs maintained some donor-specific characteristics, whereas tissue-specific, senescence-associated, and age-related DNAm patterns were erased during reprogramming.
"DNA was extracted from patient bone marrow samples and xenograft bone marrow samples using Qiagen Allprep kit.
"During embryogenesis, body growth and repair the bone substance is formed by osteoblasts, which are derived from mesenchymal stem cells.
Enrichment for CD34 and CD117 were checked via FACS analysis.
Established iPSCs were maintained on MEFs in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Glutamax, 20% knockout serum replacer, 1% nonessential amino acids, 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x L-glutamine, 0.1 mM β-Mercaptoethanol, and 50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany).
Expression and methylation data of purified Pre-B cells in four developmental stages were retrieved from our previous study (Lee et al., Nucleic Acids Res 2012)."
For 8 indibiduals, DNAs and RNAs were isolated and the methylation and expression changes during early B-cell development were identified using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 Beadchip (Illumina) and GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix)."
For CD14 samples, enricment for CD14 was controlled by FACS analysis.
For re-differentiation of iPSC towards iPS-MSCs medium was simply exchanged for MSC standard medium supplemented with 10% human platelet lysate (hPL) for 7 days, and cells were then further passaged in culture wells coated with 0.1% gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, CA, USA)."
Furthermore, hypermethylation in iP-MSC versus ESC was particularly enriched in developmental genes as well as shore regions next to CpG islands indicating that these differences are not due to tissue-specific memory or random de novo methylation.
Furthermore, iMSC#3 showed no major differences from hMSCs regarding surface marker expression.
Further, we identified GTF2I and TEAD2 as regulators of differentiation by computational prediction of over-represented transcription factor motifs in regions with differential histone modification enrichment.
"Genome wide DNA methylation profiling of leukemia stem, blast cells obtained from 15 AML patients and of normal hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells from 5 normal bone marrow.
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 5729917060_RO3CO2"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 5729917060_RO4CO2"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 5729917060_RO5CO2"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 5729917060_RO6CO2"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 8359018137_RO1CO1"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 8359018152_RO1CO1"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 8363800011_RO1CO1"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 8363800011_RO2CO1"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 8363800026_RO1CO1"
"genomic DNA from bone marrow CD34+ cells 8363800026_RO2CO1"
"genomic DNA from CMP of normal bone marrow ID2627"
"genomic DNA from CMP of normal bone marrow ID2710"
"genomic DNA from CMP of normal bone marrow ID2712"
"genomic DNA from CMP of normal bone marrow ID2748"
"genomic DNA from CMP of normal bone marrow ID2753"
"genomic DNA from GMP of normal bone marrow ID2627"
"genomic DNA from GMP of normal bone marrow ID2710"
"genomic DNA from GMP of normal bone marrow ID2712"
"genomic DNA from GMP of normal bone marrow ID2748"
"genomic DNA from GMP of normal bone marrow ID2753"
"genomic DNA from HSC of normal bone marrow ID2627"
"genomic DNA from HSC of normal bone marrow ID2710"
"genomic DNA from HSC of normal bone marrow ID2712"
"genomic DNA from HSC of normal bone marrow ID2748"
"genomic DNA from HSC of normal bone marrow ID2753"
"genomic DNA from L-MPP of normal bone marrow ID2627"
"genomic DNA from L-MPP of normal bone marrow ID2710"
"genomic DNA from L-MPP of normal bone marrow ID2712"
"genomic DNA from L-MPP of normal bone marrow ID2748"
"genomic DNA from L-MPP of normal bone marrow ID2753"
"genomic DNA from MEP of normal bone marrow ID2627"
"genomic DNA from MEP of normal bone marrow ID2710"
"genomic DNA from MEP of normal bone marrow ID2712"
"genomic DNA from MEP of normal bone marrow ID2748"
"genomic DNA from MEP of normal bone marrow ID2753"
"genomic DNA from MPP of normal bone marrow ID2627"
"genomic DNA from MPP of normal bone marrow ID2710"
"genomic DNA from MPP of normal bone marrow ID2712"
"genomic DNA from MPP of normal bone marrow ID2748"
"genomic DNA from MPP of normal bone marrow ID2753"
"Genomic DNA was extracted and purified from AML and normal bone marrow samples using Epicentre Kit according to standard instructions"
Global DNA-methylation profiles of the initial MSC, MSC-derived iPSC (iP-MSC) and embryonic stem cells (ESC) were then compared using a high density DNA-methylation array covering more than 450,000 CpG sites.
"GMP of normal bone marrow"
However, a disadvantage of primary hMSCs is the limited in vitro lifespan, but this can be overcome by introduction of the catalytic subunit of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT).
"HSC of normal bone marrow"
"Human DNA methylation Beadchip v1.2 was used to obtain DNA methylation profiles across approximately 486,000 CpGs.
"Human fetal bone marrow was obtained, and using flow cytometry antibodies, four populations of B-cell developmental stages including stage 1 (S1; predominantly multipotent progenitors before lineage commitment and common lymphoid progenitors), stage II (S2; pre-B-I cells), stage 3 (S3; pre-B-II cells) and stage 4 cells (S4; immature B cells).
"Immortalized human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cell line DNA methylation [iMSC#3 (Culture I)]"
"Immortalized human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cell line DNA methylation [iMSC#3 (Culture II)]"
iMSC#3 were grown under the same condition as hMSCs, but the medium was supplemented with 10% FBS."
In conclusion, a human bone marrow-derived stromal cell line was developed, which can be used for basic studies of mesenchymal cells and to functionally study transgenes that might play a role in oncogenic transformation."
In conclusion, DNA methylation profiles of iP-MSC clones from the same donor were closely related despite heterogeneity of MSC.
In contrast, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) assimilate towards a ground-state and may therefore give rise to more standardized cell preparations.
In line, myeloid cells from pre-leukemic PML-RARa knock-in mice did not show altered DNA methylation and expression of PML-RARa in hematopoietic progenitor cells prevented differentiation without affecting DNA methylation.
In parallel we have isolated RNA from all sources to analyze tissue source specific gene expression profile."
In parallel we have isolated RNA from all sources to analyze tissue source specific gene expression profile."""
Interestingly only BM-derived MSPCs were capable of bone formation and marrow attraction.
In the absence of isogenic controls for disease modeling applications, it would therefore be more appropriate to compare iPSC from different donors rather than a high number of different clones from the same patient."
In the absence of isogenic controls for disease modeling applications, it would therefore be more appropriate to compare iPSC from different donors rather than a high number of different clones from the same patient."""
In this paper, the generation and characterization of a TERT-immortalized, non-tumorigenic human bone marrow-derived stromal mesenchymal model cell line is described.
In this study, we elucidated the DNA methylome in primary Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) and the role of PML-RARa in establishing these patterns.
"In this study, we have analyzed DNA methylation characteristics of human mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells (MSPCs) form different tissue sources including bone marrow (BM), white adipose tissue (WAT ), umbilical cord (UC) as well as dermal fibroblasts by using the HumanMethylation450K array.
In this study we have reprogrammed mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) from human bone marrow by retrovirus-mediated overexpression of OCT-3/4, SOX2, c-MYC, and KLF4.
iPS-MSCs reacquired senescence-associated DNAm during culture expansion but they remained rejuvenated with regard to age-related DNAm.
It has been suggested that iPSC retain some tissue-specific memory whereas little is known about inter-individual epigenetic variation of iPSC clones.
"L-MPP of normal bone marrow"
Lymphoprep extraction of leukocytes was performed following 30 min no brake centrifugation.
"MEP of normal bone marrow"
"Mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells (MSPCs) from human bone marrow"
Mononuclear cells from the bone marrow were isolated using standard density centrifugation and cultured in minimum essential medium (MEM) Alpha medium (cat.
"MPP of normal bone marrow"
"""MSCs from BM, WAT, UC and skin were isolated using plastic adherence.
"MSCs from BM, WAT, UC and skin were isolated using plastic adherence.
MSCs from three donors were infected with pMXs based retroviruses (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) carrying the OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC genes.
"MSCs were isolated from bone marrow (tibia plateau) after written consent using guidelines approved by the Ethic Committee of the Use of Human Subjects at the University of Aachen (permit number: EK128/09).
MSCs were subcutaneously implanted into immune-compromised mice to comparatively evaluate bone formation and subsequent bone marrow attraction.
Non-adherent cells were removed after approximately 24 h by replacement of the medium.
"normal bone marrow progenitor cells"
"Normal human bone marrow cells"
Overall, DNA-methylation patterns of iP-MSC and ESC were similar whereas some CpG sites revealed highly significant differences, which were not related to parental MSC.
Overall, iPS-MSCs and MSCs are similar in function but differ in their epigenetic makeup."
"Patient and donor samples were obtained either from blood or bone marrow.
"primary cells isolated from patient's blood or bone marrow"
"Primary hMSCs were obtained from the hip of a healthy donor after informed consent.
"""Reprogramming of somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) is an epigenetic phenomenon.
"Reprogramming of somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) is an epigenetic phenomenon.
RUNX2 target genes were associated with cellular growth, movement, apoptosis and PDGF BB and p53 signaling.
"sample origin: Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cell"
Samples included 20 leukemia stem cells, 24 blast cells and 30 normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (6 different types from 5 normal bone marrows)."
"sample type: Remission bone marrow"
Self-renewal and multipotent differentiation capacity are key elements in the increasing interest of this cell type.
"Sorted normal bone marrow cells from healthy volunteers at Washington University"
"Standardization of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) remains a major obstacle in regenerative medicine.
Starting material and culture expansion affect cell preparations and render comparison between studies difficult.
Subsequently, the adherent cells were allowed to expand until 70% confluence (5–6 days) before they were harvested and further expanded.
Subsequently, we searched for CpG sites with donor-specific variation in MSC preparations.
Surprisingly, RUNX2 was found to bind both at the 5’ and 3’ ends of genes, and also at distal regulatory elements, and was co-localized with activating histone modifications at approximately half of bound sites.
SUZ12 and REST binding sites identified in embryonic stem cells were, however, preferentially DNA hypermethylated in APL.
The cell line had a normal karyotype, and high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization confirmed that the cells in general had normal copy number.
The gene expression profiles of immortalized and primary hMSCs were also similar, whereas the corresponding methylation profiles were more diverse.
The Illumina Infinium 450k Human DNA methylation Beadchip was used to obtain DNA methylation profiles across approximately 450,000 CpGs in the samples.
"The origin of aberrant DNA methylation in cancer remains largely unknown.
The predictions were confirmed by siRNA knockdown of the transcription factors which lead to inhibition of differentiation."
The resulting cell line, iMSC#3, maintained capacity to differentiate into osteoblasts and adipocytes, and growth characteristics comparable to primary hMSCs into after long-term culturing (155 population doublings).
These “epigenetic fingerprints” were highly enriched in non-promoter regions and outside of CpG islands – and they were maintained upon reprogramming into iP-MSC.
These features correlated with unique epigenetic characteristics potentially enabling BM-derived cells to undergo endochondral ossification."
These iPS-MSCs revealed similar morphology, immunophenotype, in vitro differentiation potential, and gene expression profiles as primary MSCs.
These results suggest that aberrant DNA methylation is associated with leukemia phenotype but not required for PML-RARa-mediated initiation of leukemogenesis."
"The study investigated the abberrent DNA methylation in correlation with gene expression in cytogenetic normal acute myeloid leukemia.
"The study investigated the changes in DNA-methylation and gene expression during granulopoiesis.
The trabecular bone pieces were obtained from the central part of the femoral head of Spanish (Caucasian) patients with hip fractures (due to osteoporosis) or subjects with osteoarthritis.
This is to our knowledge the first genome-wide description of RUNX2 targets in bone biology.
"""tisse source for mscs: bone marrow (BM)"""
"tisse source for mscs: bone marrow (BM)"
"tissue: bone marrow / peripheral blood"
"tissue: fetal bone marrow"
To exclude contamination of feeder layer cells, iPSCs were adjusted to a feeder-free system on matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) in mTeSR™1 medium (Stemcell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) for at least three passages.
To gain mechanistic insights explaining this differences we analyzed gene expression characteristics of MSC from all four tissue sources using  Affymetrix Genechip Human Gene 2.0 ST Array."
To gain mechanistic insights explaining this differences we analyzed gene expression characteristics of MSC from all four tissue sources using  Affymetrix Genechip Human Gene 2.0 ST Array."""
To this end CMP, GMP, PMC and PMN cell populations were isolated by FACS from bone marrow from healthy donors and analysed by CAGE as well as expression and DNA microarrays."
Transcription factor binding sites, e.g.
Unexpectedly, PML-RARa binding sites were also protected from aberrant DNA methylation in APL.
"We examined DNA methylation and RNA expression status during early B-cell development by sorting multiple replicates of four separate stages of pre-B cells derived from normal human fetal bone marrow and applied high-dimension DNA methylation scanning and expression arrays."
We here describe the pattern of gene expression, histone modification and DNA binding of the bone master regulator RUNX2 during osteogenic differentiation of an immortalized human bone marrow-derived MSC cell line.
We reprogrammed bone marrow MSCs into iPSCs which were subsequently re-differentiated towards MSCs.
Where available, purification was performed using MACS columns following anti-CD34 bead conjugation to samples (anti-CD14 for CD14 samles)."
