A new trial starting in France is aiming to use the dental stem cells of a simple 
and non-invasive tissue source such as dental pulp to develop a brand new ...
Mar 11, 2019 ... For lateral extra-articular tenodesis (LET), a strip of the ITB is often used as a soft-
tissue source, such as in the well-described modified Lemaire ...
... in cancers, our results constitute the first report of human disease classification 
using gene expression profiling in a complex tissue source such as brain.
Oct 24, 2018 ... Nonetheless, there are several limitations associated with the MSC tissue source 
such as infrequent and invasive bone marrow sampling ...
Feb 16, 2018 ... Thus, augmented formation by another tissue source, such as the lung or kidney, 
would be expected to supersede the contribution to TxM from ...
Cell line definition is - a cell culture selected for uniformity from a cell population 
derived from a usually homogeneous tissue source (such as an organ). How to ...
Herein, we hypothesize that an alternate tissue source such as adipose tissue 
would provide an ideal cell source for tissue engineering applications.
The bioengineered collagen constructs comprise a sheet-like layer of purified 
collagenous tissue matrix derived from a tissue source, such as the tunica ...
Eating an infected tissue source (such as raw or undercooked meat) ... initially 
infects the cells of the cat's intestinal tract and the associated lymph tissue.
establishment of a renewable tissue source such as per- petual cell lines.8 Blood 
and organ-derived specimens possess many of these attributes; however, their ...
Jul 21, 2016 ... Nonviable tissue must be debrided because cell debris impairs healing. ... tissue 
source (such as dermis, pericardium, or intestinal mucosa).
The present invention provides a liver-derived devitalized mammalian 
parenchymatous tissue composition which includes an interstitial structure of 
connective ...
Nonviable tissue must be debrided because cell debris impairs ... necrotic or 
fibrous tissue accelerates .... porcine). • tissue source (such as dermis, pericardi-.
Nov 22, 2018 ... In a further embodiment, a system is provided for treating a tissue site of a patient, 
the system comprising a reduced-pressure source to supply ...
Jul 28, 2016 ... Due to their derivation from postembryonic tissue, MSC derived from ..... in 
contrast to cells isolated from a single tissue source such as WJ.
... removing extraneous words such as “mole,” “BCCA,” “lesion,” and so on; 
rearranging the order of the words; adding the tissue source, such as skin, in front 
of ...
from control brain tissue samples based solely on gene expression profile. 
Although ... expression profiling in a complex tissue source such as brain. © 2001
 ...
The cusps provide mutual support by the stretching of a microscopically 
inhomogeneous architecture consisting of well-defined tissue layers, each of 
which is ...
Increasingly, it is clear that adipose tissue is rich in resident stromal and ... 
whether a vascular bed from a different, more specialized tissue source such as 
brain ...
Aug 1, 2010 ... “The ideal biomarker should be detected in a surrogate tissue thus ... or 
otherwise, in a peripheral tissue source such as blood, at an early ...
Although a peripheral blood karyotype is usually adequate, a second tissue, such 
as ..... A second tissue source, such as skin fibroblasts, buccal mucosa cell, ...
Nov 10, 2011 ... ... but more likely from a local tissue source such as the periosteum. Fractionation 
of the ECM degradation products resulted in the identification ...
accommodates possible heteroplasmies between tissues or two samples from 
the same tissue source (such as hair) in a single individual, or sequencing errors.
... a local tissue source such as the periosteum. Fractionation of the ECM 
degradation products resulted in the identification of a highly conserved cryptic 
peptide ...
Aa cell culture selected for uniformity from a cell population derived from a 
usually homogeneous tissue source (such as an organ). http://www.merriam-.
The Abnormal Regulation of Gene Expression in Autistic Brain Tissue ... 
classification using gene expression profiling in a complex tissue source such as 
brain.
Jul 9, 2018 ... CRO services, clinical, diagnostics, and research tests, and tissue and ...... from a 
usually homogeneous tissue source (such as an organ or ...
Blood and liver tissue samples were collected at 2, 4 and 6 weeks from the onset 
..... white blood cells or [43]. from any tissue source, such as endothelium [30].
The problem increases with the tissue source such as PCR Polymerase chain 
reaction fruits and flowers, which are rich in such compounds. We have tried ...
The Stem Cells need to be isolated either from a tissue source, such as bone 
marrow or fat, or from a commercial source. They are then mixed with Platelet 
Rich ...
