A new trial starting in France is aiming to use the dental stem cells of a simple 
and non-invasive tissue source such as dental pulp to develop a brand new ...
... in cancers, our results constitute the first report of human disease classification 
using gene expression profiling in a complex tissue source such as brain.
Mar 11, 2019 ... For lateral extra-articular tenodesis (LET), a strip of the ITB is often used as a soft-
tissue source, such as in the well-described modified Lemaire ...
Following the isolation of hADSCs from omentum tissue, these cells were ... 
Herein, we hypothesize that an alternate tissue source such as adipose tissue 
would ...
... to the establishment of a renewable tissue source such as perpetual cell lines. 
... DNA-containing specimens, such as saliva, buccal specimens, nail clippings, ...
Feb 16, 2018 ... Thus, augmented formation by another tissue source, such as the lung or kidney, 
would be expected to supersede the contribution to TxM from ...
Cell line definition is - a cell culture selected for uniformity from a cell population 
derived from a usually homogeneous tissue source (such as an organ). How to ...
Oct 24, 2018 ... Nonetheless, there are several limitations associated with the MSC tissue source 
such as infrequent and invasive bone marrow sampling ...
The bioengineered collagen constructs comprise a sheet-like layer of purified 
collagenous tissue matrix derived from a tissue source, such as the tunica ...
... profiles of postmortem brain tissue from RTT patients and matched controls. ... 
using gene expression profiling in a complex tissue source such as brain.
Invertebrate tissue culture has a long history, actually ... tions have been well 
resolved such that, for many .... heterologous tissue source (such as embryos) to.
Jul 21, 2016 ... Nonviable tissue must be debrided because cell debris impairs healing. ... tissue 
source (such as dermis, pericardium, or intestinal mucosa).
Jul 28, 2016 ... Due to their derivation from postembryonic tissue, MSC derived from ..... in 
contrast to cells isolated from a single tissue source such as WJ.
Sep 9, 2004 ... The devitalized tissue can be from an allogeneic tissue source, an ..... scaffold 
may be derived from a xenogeneic tissue source, such as a pig.
Once the pathologist is ready to dictate, a command such as “Diagnosis” or “
Begin ... rearranging the order of the words; adding the tissue source, such as 
skin, ...
Nov 22, 2018 ... In a further embodiment, a system is provided for treating a tissue site of ..... any 
tissue source, such as from bovine, equine, or porcine tissues.
from control brain tissue samples based solely on gene expression profile. 
Although ... expression profiling in a complex tissue source such as brain. © 2001
 ...
May 29, 2013 ... Autologous adult stem cell therapy refers to using a patient's own blood or other 
tissue source such as fatty tissue as the source of adult stem ...
Sep 7, 2018 ... Stem cell therapy has great potential in tissue regeneration and repair for ... 
harvest from the patient's own tissue source such as bone marrow.
Tissue valves are flexible and function somewhat like natural semilunar valves. ... 
scaffolds derived from a natural tissue source, such as valve or pericardium, ...
Apr 28, 2011 ... For example, mouse embryonic fibroblast feeder cells have been used ..... any 
collagen containing organ or tissue source, such as skin, fascia, ...
samples from the same tissue source (such as hair) in a single individual, or 
sequencing errors. A ''false exclusion'' of a database association would occur 
when.
Other ultrasound findings such as coarctation of aorta or cardiac defects, 
intrauterine ..... A second tissue source, such as skin fibroblasts, buccal mucosa 
cell, ...
Apr 3, 2014 ... tissue-destructive proteinases such as matrix metalloproteinases, .... harvest from 
the patient's own tissue source such as bone marrow ...
In addition, patient considerations, such as the need to dose the product .... tissue 
source, such as autologous, selected allogeneic, or xenogeneic tissue. Certain ...
The cells that make up the structure of our tissues and organs only have a limited 
... The Stem Cells need to be isolated either from a tissue source, such as bone ...
Jan 19, 1990 ... such that the transport reaction as a whole becomes the assay for the missing ..... 
cell or tissue source, such as CHO cells or bovine brain. This.
Jun 21, 2018 ... ... aims to develop a pre-vascularized tissue-engineered bone construct using 
human cells of a simple and non-invasive tissue source such as ...
Aug 13, 2001 ... origin: neural stem cells are biased to generate neurons and glia; ..... tissue 
source such as mammalian skin has important therapeutic.
antioxidant enzymatic status in liver tissue. ... often been used to elevate serum or 
tissue cholesterol ..... from any tissue source, such as endothelium [30]. The.
