62 human skin fibroblast samples obtained from Coriell and McGill Cellbank, bisulfite converted DNA was hybridized to the Illumina Infinium 450K chip.
A6124 Fibroblast / IMR-90.
Bisulphite converted DNAs of two IVF-ESCs, two sendai produced iPSC lines, two retro-virus produced iPSC lines, four NT-ESCs, and the parental fibroblast were  hybridized to the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation 450K Beadchip.
BJ fibroblast cell line.
CD34+ cells were isolated from fresh umbilical cord blood after written consent according to the guidelines specifically approved by the Ethic Committee of RWTH Aachen University (Permit Number: EK187/08) using  the CD34 Micro Bead Kit on a MiniMACS system (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany). Cells were cultured in StemSpan serum free expansion medium (Stem Cell Technologies, Grenoble, France) supplemented with 10 µg/mL heparin (ratiopharm, GmbH, Ulm, Germany), 20 ng/mL thrombopoietin (TPO; PeproTech GmbH, Hamburg, Germany), 10 ng/mL stem cell factor (SCF; PeproTech), 10 ng/mL fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1; PeproTech). Culture was either performed on tissue culture plastic (TCP) or on a confluent layer of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs; passage 3 to 6). After seven days, CD34+ and CD34- fractions were again separated as described above.
cell description: adult toe fibroblast from apparently healthy 21 year old, 7% of the cells examined showing random chromosome loss/gain -Coriell.
cell description: fetal buttock/thigh fibroblast.
cell description: fetal lung fibroblast.
cell description: skin fibroblast, The line was established from skin taken from normal foreskin. - ATCC.  (PMID: 9916803).
cell line: BJ fibroblast cell line.
cell line: ID 1018 fibroblast cell line.
cell type: fetal lung fibroblastl.
cell type: fibroblast parental cell line.
cell type: nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C1.2, passage 13.
cell type: nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C1.2, passage 9, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
cell type: nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C2, passage 13.
cell type: nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C2, passage 9, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
cell type: nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) fetal Fibroblast iPSC clone 6.1, passage 23.
cell type: nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) fetal Fibroblast iPSC clone 6.1, passage 38, p7 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
cell type (precursor used to generate ipscs): dermal fibroblast.
cell type: Synovial Fibroblast.
Comparative studies in primates are extremely restricted because we only have access to a few types of cell lines from non-human apes and to a limited collection of frozen tissues. In order to gain better insight into regulatory processes that underlie variation in complex phenotypes, we must have access to faithful model systems for a wide range of tissues and cell types. To facilitate this, we have generated a panel of 7 fully characterized chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines derived from fibroblasts of healthy donors. All lines are free of integration from exogenous reprogramming vectors, can be maintained using standard iPSC culture techniques, and have proliferative and differentiation potential similar to human and mouse lines. To begin demonstrating the utility of comparative iPSC panels, we collected RNA-seq data and methylation profiles from the chimpanzee iPSCs and their corresponding fibroblast precursors, as well as from 7 human iPSCs and their precursors, which were of multiple cell type and population origins. Overall, we observed much less regulatory variation within species in the iPSCs than in the somatic precursors, indicating that the reprogramming process has erased many of the differences observed between somatic cells of different origins. We identified 4,918 differentially expressed genes and 1,986 differentially methylated regions between iPSCs of the two species, many of which are novel inter-species differences and not observed between the somatic cells of the two species. Our panel will help realise the potential of iPSCs, and in combination with genomic technologies, transform studies of comparative evolution in primates.
donor cell type: dermal fibroblast.
donor cell type: foreskin fibroblast.
Fibroblast 14 - parental.
Fibroblast 83 - parental.
Fibroblast cultures were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum.
Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling by Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation 450K Beadchip was performed on a total of 21 human cell lines, including: an isogenic set of 3 nuclear-transfer embryonic stem cell (NT-ESC) lines, 2 RNA-reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines and their parental neonatal fibroblast cell line; an isogenic set of 1 NT-ESC line, 6 iPSC lines and their parental adult fibroblast cell line (derived from a type 1 diabetic subject); as well as 7 control embryonic stem cell (ESC) lines.
Global DNA CpG methylation profiling of human embryonic stem cells, fibroblast iPSC, and low passage stromal primed myeloid iPSC before and after conversion to the naïve state.
human induced pluripotent stem cells derived from dermal fibroblast.
human induced pluripotent stem cells derived from dermal fibroblast of neonatal foreskin.
human iPS cells generated from dermal fibroblast.
ID 1018 fibroblast cell line.
iPSC and ESC lines were maintained in “hiPSC Media” composed of DMEM/F12 (Sigma-Aldrich, www.sigma.com) with 20% KnockOut Serum Replacement (Invitrogen, www.invitrogen.com), 1mM nonanimal  L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1mM Β-mercaptoethanol, and 10 ng/ml FGF2 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) on 0.1% gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich) coated plates preseeded with mitomycin C-inactivated or irradiated mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) feeder cells.  Cells were maintained in a 5% CO2 air environment. For endodermal differentiation, cells were passed onto matrigel-coated dishes at 80% confluency.  On the following day, designated “T0”, differentiation was induced by culture in media containing growth factors listed below.  From T0-T6, differentiation media included 2mM l-glutamine, and 4.5x10-4 M monothioglycerol (MTG).  Cells were grown in T0 media, consisting of RPMI-based serum-free medium with Chir 99021 (2ug/ml) and Activin A (100 ng/ml), for one day. On days “T1-2”, medium was changed to RPMI with BMP4 (0.5 ng/ml), FGF2 (10ng/ml), Activin A (100 ng/ml), and VEGF (10 ng/ml).  On days “T3-4”, cells were cultured in SFD media(Gouon-Evans et al., 2006) with BMP4 (0.5 ng/ml), FGF2 (10ng/ml), Activin A (100 ng/ml), and VEGF (10 ng/ml). For hepatic differentiation, PSCs were differentiated as monolayer cultures as outlined above to generate definitive endoderm and then further differentiated for an additional 3 weeks in SFD-based media with ascorbic acid (50mcg/ml), monothioglycerol (4.5x10-4 M ), and the following supplements: T7-12: BMP4 (50 ng/ml), FGF2 (10 ng/ml), VEGF (10 ng/ml), EGF (10ng/ml), TGFa (20 ng/ml), HGF (100 ng/ml), and 0.1 uM Dexamethasone; T13-18: FGF2 (10 ng/ml), VEGF (10 ng/ml), EGF (10 ng/ml), HGF (100 ng/ml), Oncostatin M (20 ng/ml), Vitamin K (6 ug/ml), 1.5 uM gamma secretase inhibitor, 0.1 uM Dexamethasone, and 1% DMSO; T19-24: HGF (100 ng/ml), Oncostatin M (20 ng/ml), Vitamin K (6 ug/ml), and 0.1 uM Dexamethasone. Differentiating human PSCs were maintained in a 5% CO2, 5% O2, 90% N2 environment.
Limbal epithelial stem cell (LESC) deficiency represents a significant clinical problem especially in bilateral cases. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) may be a promising source of LESC, allowing standardized and continual propagation and banking. The objective of this study was to generate iPSC from human limbal epithelial cultures and differentiate them back into limbal epithelial cells using substrata mimicking the natural LESC niche. Using Yamanaka’s episomal vectors limbal-derived iPSC were reprogrammed from LESC cultured from donor corneoscleral rims and from human skin fibroblasts. A clone from limbal-derived iPSC expressed stemness markers, had a diploid karyotype, and produced teratomas in nude mice representing three germ layers. Compared to parental LESC, this clone had fewer specific gene methylation changes revealed using the Illumina Infinium Methylation 450k Beadchips than compared to skin fibroblasts. The expression of putative LESC markers was examined by quantitative RT-PCR and immunostaining in limbal-derived and fibroblast-derived iPSC cultured on denuded human amniotic membrane or denuded cornea. Limbal-derived iPSC had markedly stronger expression of PAX6, ABCG2, Np63, keratins 14, 15, 17, and N-cadherin than fibroblast-derived iPSC. On denuded corneas, limbal-derived iPSC showed the expression of differentiated corneal keratins 3 and 12. The data suggest that iPSC differentiation to a desired lineage may be facilitated by their generation from the same tissue. This may be related to preservation of parental tissue epigenetic methylation signatures in iPSC and use of biological substrata similar to the natural niche of parental cells. The data pave the way for generating transplantable LESC from limbal-derived iPSC.
MSC from three donors (passage 3) were infected on two consecutive days with equal amounts of pMXs based retroviruses (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) carrying the OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC genes. On day 3, medium was changed to high glucose DMEM (Gibco), 20% FCS, 1% nonessential amino acids (NAA), 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x L-glutamine, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) and 50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany). On day 6 the cells were plated on gelatin-coated dishes containing irradiated CF1 murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), and on day 7 the culture medium was supplemented with 20 μg/ml vitamin C (Sigma) and 1mM valproic acid (Sigma). Between days 21–30 the ESC-like colonies were observed and mechanically isolated. Established iP-MSC were maintained on MEFs in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Glutamax, 20% knockout serum replacer, 1% NAA, 0.1 mM βME and 50 ng/ml bFGF. Cells were passaged by manual dissection of cell clusters every 5-6 days.
MSC from three donors (passage 3) were infected on two consecutive days with equal amounts of pMXs based retroviruses (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) carrying the OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC genes. On day 3, medium was changed to high glucose DMEM (Gibco), 20% FCS, 1% nonessential amino acids (NAA), 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x L-glutamine, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) and 50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany). On day 6 the cells were plated on gelatin-coated dishes containing irradiated CF1 murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), and on day 7 the culture medium was supplemented with 20 μg/ml vitamin C (Sigma) and 1mM valproic acid (Sigma). Between days 21–30 the ESC-like colonies were observed and mechanically isolated. Established iP-MSC were maintained on MEFs in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Glutamax, 20% knockout serum replacer, 1% NAA, 0.1 mM βME and 50 ng/ml bFGF. Cells were passaged by manual dissection of cell clusters every 5-6 days.
MSC from three donors were infected on two consecutive days with equal amounts of pMXs based retroviruses (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) carrying the OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC genes. On day 3, medium was changed to high glucose DMEM (Gibco), 20% FCS, 1% nonessential amino acids (NAA), 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x L-glutamine, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) and 50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany). On day 6 the cells were plated on gelatin-coated dishes containing irradiated CF1 murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), and on day 7 the culture medium was supplemented with 20 μg/ml vitamin C (Sigma) and 1mM valproic acid (Sigma). Between days 21–30 the ESC-like colonies were observed and mechanically isolated. Established iP-MSC were maintained on MEFs in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Glutamax, 20% knockout serum replacer, 1% NAA, 0.1 mM βME and 50 ng/ml bFGF. Cells were passaged by manual dissection of cell clusters every 5-6 days.
MSC from three donors were infected on two consecutive days with equal amounts of pMXs based retroviruses (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) carrying the OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC genes. On day 3, medium was changed to high glucose DMEM (Gibco), 20% FCS, 1% nonessential amino acids (NAA), 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x L-glutamine, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) and 50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany). On day 6 the cells were plated on gelatin-coated dishes containing irradiated CF1 murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), and on day 7 the culture medium was supplemented with 20 μg/ml vitamin C (Sigma) and 1mM valproic acid (Sigma). Between days 21–30 the ESC-like colonies were observed and mechanically isolated. Established iP-MSC were maintained on MEFs in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Glutamax, 20% knockout serum replacer, 1% NAA, 0.1 mM βME and 50 ng/ml bFGF. Cells were passaged by manual dissection of cell clusters every 5-6 days.
MSCs were isolated from bone marrow (tibia plateau) after written consent using guidelines approved by the Ethic Committee of the Use of Human Subjects at the University of Aachen (permit number: EK128/09). MSCs from three donors were infected with pMXs based retroviruses (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) carrying the OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC genes. Established iPSCs were maintained on MEFs in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Glutamax, 20% knockout serum replacer, 1% nonessential amino acids, 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x L-glutamine, 0.1 mM β-Mercaptoethanol, and 50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany). To exclude contamination of feeder layer cells, iPSCs were adjusted to a feeder-free system on matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) in mTeSR™1 medium (Stemcell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) for at least three passages. Cells were passaged every 5-6 days enzymatically with dispase (1 g/ml, Stemcell Technologies). For re-differentiation of iPSC towards iPS-MSCs medium was simply exchanged for MSC standard medium supplemented with 10% human platelet lysate (hPL) for 7 days, and cells were then further passaged in culture wells coated with 0.1% gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, CA, USA).
nonviral 7 factor  Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C1.2, passage 13.
nonviral 7 factor  Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C1.2, passage 9, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
nonviral 7 factor  Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C2, passage 13.
nonviral 7 factor  Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C2, passage 9, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C1.2, passage 13.
nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C1.2, passage 9, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C2, passage 13.
nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) Adult Fibroblast iPSC clone 7F-C2, passage 9, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) fetal Fibroblast iPSC clone 6.1, passage 23.
nonviral 7 factor (SOX2, OCT4, KLF4, MYC, LIN28, NANOG, SV40 T antigen) fetal Fibroblast iPSC clone 6.1, passage 38, p7 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
nonviral 7F fetal fibroblast iPSC clone 6.1 p23.
nonviral 7F fetal fibroblast iPSC clone 6.1, passage 38, p7 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
primary skin fibroblast sample.
Results   We report the joint analysis of sequence variants, gene expression and DNA methylation in primary fibroblast samples derived from a set of 62 unrelated individuals. Approximately 2% of the most variable CpG sites are mappable in cis to sequence variation, usually within 5kb. However, only 5% of those mappable CpG sites also have methylation levels that correlate in cis with a gene's expression level. Methylation and gene expression are often correlated but not always in the expected direction (negative for promoter CpGs, positive for gene body CpGs). Population-level correlation between methylation and expression is strongest in a subset of developmentally significant genes, including all four HOX clusters. The presence and sign of this correlation are best predicted using specific histone marks or DNase hypersensitivity rather than position of the CpG site with respect to the gene, showing that other epigenetic markers are necessary to interpret downstream effects of individual methylation variants.
Rheumathoid Arthritis Synovial Fibroblast.
sample condition: fibroblast parental cell line; patient 14; no treatment.
sample condition: fibroblast parental cell line; patient 83; no treatment.
sample type: non-integrated Adult Fibroblast iPSC generated in the Zambidis laboratory.
sample type: non-integrated Adult Fibroblast iPSC generated in the Zambidis laboratory, p4 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
sample type: non-integrated fetal Fibroblast iPSC generated in the Zambidis laboratory.
sample type: non-integrated fetal Fibroblast iPSC generated in the Zambidis laboratory p7 after conversion to a naïve state with L3i.
The variation among induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) in their differentiation capacity to specific lineages is frequently attributed to somatic memory. In this study, we compared hematopoietic differentiation capacity of 35 human iPSC lines derived from four different tissues and four embryonic stem cell lines. The analysis revealed that hematopoietic commitment capacity (PSCs to hematopoietic precursors) is correlated with the expression level of the IGF2 gene independent of the iPSC origins. In contrast, maturation capacity (hematopoietic precursors to mature blood) is affected by iPSC origin; blood-derived iPSCs showed the highest capacity. However, some fibroblast-derived iPSCs showed higher capacity than blood-derived clones. Tracking of DNA methylation changes during reprogramming reveals that maturation capacity is highly associated with aberrant DNA methylation acquired during reprogramming, rather than the types of iPSC origins. These data demonstrated that variations in the hematopoietic differentiation capacity of iPSCs are not attributable to somatic memories of their origins.
tissue: transdifferentiated fibroblast to endothelia with Yamanaka transcription factors (OSKM) and MIM media.
tissue: transdifferentiated fibroblast to endothelia with Yamanaka Transcription Factors (OSKM) and miR302-367.
tissue: transdifferentiated fibroblast to Smooth Muscle with Yamanaka Transcription Factors (OSKM).
tissue: transdifferentiated fibroblast to Smooth Muscle with Yamanaka Transcription Factors (OSKM) and miR302-368.
Transdifferentiated fibroblast to endothelia with Yamanaka transcription factors (OSKM) and MIM media.
transdifferentiated fibroblast to endothelia with Yamanaka Transcription Factors (OSKM) and miR302-367.
transdifferentiated fibroblast to Smooth Muscle with Yamanaka Transcription Factors (OSKM).
transdifferentiated fibroblast to Smooth Muscle with Yamanaka Transcription Factors (OSKM) and miR302-368.
We differeniated human pluripotent stem cell lines by using StemPro-34 (Invitrogen) based media for 15 days.Cytokines or a chemical compound were utilized as follows during differentiation: on day 0-1, human BMP4 (10 ng/ml) and Rock-inhibitor (Y27632) (10 μM); on day 1-4, human BMP4 (10 ng/ml) and human basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF; 5 ng/ml); on day 4-8, human vascular endothelial growth factor (hVEGF; 10 ng/mL), hbFGF (1 ng/mL), human interleukin-6 (hIL-6; 10 ng/mL), hIL-3 (40 ng/mL), hIL-11 (5 ng/mL), human stem cell factor (hSCF; 100 ng/mL), and human Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (hFlt3L; 100 ng/mL); and on Day 8-15, hVEGF (10 ng/mL), hIL-6 (10 ng/mL), hIL-3 (40 ng/mL), hIL-11 (5 ng/mL), hSCF (100 ng/mL), hFlt3L (100 ng/mL), human erythropoietin (hEPO; 4U/ml), and human thrombopoietin (50 ng/mL).
we generate iPSCs from a common fibroblast cell source using either the Yamanaka factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and MYC) or the Thomson factors (OCT4, SOX2, NANOG and LIN28) and determined their genome-wide DNA methylation profiles. In addition to shared DNA methylation aberrations present in all our iPSCs, we identify Yamanaka-iPSC (Y-iPSCs)-specific and Thomson-iPSCs (T-iPSC)-specific recurrent aberrations.