additional diagnosis: coronary heart disease, chronic kidney disease, peripheral vascular disease.
Bisulfte converted DNA from 95 samples of normal kidney, nephrogenic rest and Wilms tumour was hybridised to Illumina HumanMethylation450 bead chips.
cell description: embryonic kidney, cells contain Adenovirus 5 DNA (PMID: 11967234).
cell line: HEK293 human embryonic kidney cells.
Clones of SCC003 expressing either empty vector control, HPV-16 E7, HPV-16 E6, or both HPV-16 E6 and E7, respectively: They were generated by infection of the SCC003 cell line with retroviruses and single cell cloning as follows. Viruses were produced by transfecting Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK) 293T cells with pLXSN (empty vector or containing the HPV-16 E6, E7 or E6&E7 cDNAs, kind gifts from Dr. David Beach) together with pHIT- VSVG and MLV-gag/pol (kind gifts from Dr. Juan Martin-Serrano) using polyethylenimine (Polysciences, Inc.). 72 hours post-transfection, viruses were harvested by removal of the medium and filtration through 0.45um surfactant-free filters (Nalgene). The filtered virus stocks were either frozen at -80C or diluted 1:2 in DMEM/10%FBS containing 8ug/ml Polybrene (to give a final conc. of 4ug/ml) and added to SCC003 cells grown to a confluence of 40-50%. Following overnight incubation, the cells were washed to remove virus and medium was replaced with DMEM/10%FBS. At 48-72hrs post-infection cells were passaged at a ratio of 1:5 into selection medium containing 400ug/ml G418. Following death of all mock-infected cells (approx. 1 – 2 weeks), cells were removed from selection and plated at limiting dilution in 96 well plates to generate single cell clones. HPV-16 E6 and E7 qPCR was conducted as described (Wang-Johanning et al. 2002; Zhao et al. 2005). To assess E6 and E7 expression levels in E6-transduced, E7-transduced and E6&E7-transduced SCC003 cell line clones (and empty vector controls), qPCR was performed on cDNA following reverse transcription (Superscript-II, Invitrogen) of total RNA purified from cells using the miRNeasy kit (QIAGEN) as per manufacturers’ recommendations.
Epigenome analysis of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) tissue versus matched normal kidney tissue.
Genome wide DNA methylation profiling of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) tissue versus matched normal kidney tissue. The Illumina Infinium 450k Human DNA methylation Beadchip was used to obtain DNA methylation profiles across approximately 450,000 CpGs in tumor and adjacent normal kidney tissue samples from ccRCC patients. Samples included 46 paired fresh frozen ccRCC tumor and adjacent normal kidney tissues.
Genome wide DNA methylation profiling of normal and tumoral urological tissues (Prostate, Kidney and Bladder). The Illumina Infinium 450k Human DNA methylation Beadchip was used to obtain DNA methylation profiles across approximately 27,000 CpGs in urological fresh frozzen tissue samples. Samples included morphologically normal samples of each tissue and tumor samples. Kidney: 6 normal and 17 tumor samples; Bladder: 5 normal and 25 tumor samples; Prostate: 5 Normal and 25 tumor samples.
Genome wide DNA methylation profiling of normal kidney (n=36), nephrogenic rest (n=22) and Wilms tumour (n=37) was performed using the Illumina 450k array. Two papers were composed after analysis of this data (1) describes comparative analysis of 22 matched normal kidney-Wilms tumour pairs which identified biomarker differentially methylated regions (DMRs) that could be detected in patient blood; (2) describes comparative analysis of 20 matched trios which identified changes in methylation associated with progression from the precursor lesion towards tumourigenesis.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 1..
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 10.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 11.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 12.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 13.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 14.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 15.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 16.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 17.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 18.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 19.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 2.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 20.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 21.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 22.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 23.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 24.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 25.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 26.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 27.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 28.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 29.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 3.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 30.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 31.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 32.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 33.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 34.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 35.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 36.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 4.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 5.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 6.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 7.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 8.
genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal kidney 9.
genomic DNA from Kidney of a 112 year old female subject (Sample2).
genomic DNA from Kidney of a 112 year old female subject (Sample50).
Human DNA methylation Beadchip v1.2 was used to obtain n=64 Illumina DNA methylation arrays from 30 tissues. For each of the following tissues, we obtained at least 2 replicates: adipose, adrenal gland, aorta, bone, bone-marrow, breast, buccal cells, cartilage, cerebellum, colon, diaphragm, esophagus , frontal cortex, kidney, heart, hippocampus, liver, lung, lymph node, midbrain,  muscle, occipital cortex, pancreas, pericardium skin, spleen, stomach, temporal cortex, thyroid, whole blood.
Mastermind-like 1 (MAML1) is a transcriptional coregulator that has been associated with early development of many systems such as neuronal, muscular, cardiovascular and urogenital. The present study aimed to explore the genome-wide effects of MAML1 on gene expression and DNA methylation in human embryonic kidney cells. RNA expression was measured using a microarray that screens approximately 36,000 transcripts, and DNA methylation was determined for 450,000 CpG sites. 225 genes were found to be differentially expressed, while 11802 CpG sites were found to be differentially methylated in MAML1-expressing cells. A subset of 211 differentially methylated loci was associated with the expression of 85 genes. Gene ontology analysis revealed that these genes are involved in the regulation of urogenital system development, cell adhesion and embryogenesis.
Mastermind-like protein 1 regulates DNA methylation and expression of early developmental gene clusters in human embryonic kidney cells (methylation).
Methylation Profiling of Human Kidney Tubules.
Methylome analysis of normal kidney, nephrogenic rest and Wilms tumor.
The MAML1 cell lines were constructed by transfecting human embryonic kidney HEK293 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) with the pcDNA3.1-MAML1 vector, and stable clones were selected with geneticin. For siRNA experiments, HEK293 cells were transiently transfected with 100 nM MAML1 siRNA (a predesigned MAML1 SMARTpool set of 4 siRNAs; Dharmacon, Lafayette Colorado, USA) or control siRNA using DharmaFECT 1 siRNA reagents (Dharmacon) in 6-well plates. DNA was collected 72 hours post-transfection.
We extract genomic DNA from microdissected human kidney tubule samples. And used these genomic DNA for the Illumina 450K beads array.
We sought to decrease the cell type heterogeneity of kidney tissues to increase the resolution of methylation profiles. To that end, microdissected human kidney tissue from patients are used and hybridized on Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays.
