5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), an oxidized derivative of 5-methylcytosine (5mC), has been implicated as an important epigenetic regulator of mammalian development.  Current procedures use cost-prohibitive DNA sequencing methods to discriminate 5hmC from 5mC, limiting their accessibility to the scientific community.  Here we report a method that combines TET-assisted bisulfite conversion with Illumina 450K DNA methylation arrays for a low-cost high-throughput approach that distinguishes 5hmC and 5mC signals. Implementing this approach, termed TAB-array, we assessed DNA methylation dynamics in the differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into cardiovascular and neural progenitors. With the ability to discriminate 5mC and 5hmC, we found a much larger number of dynamically methylated genomic regions implicated in the development of these lineages than we could detect by 5mC analysis alone. The increased resolution and accuracy afforded by this approach provides a powerful means to investigate the distinct contributions of 5mC and 5hmC in human development and disease.
cell type: embryonic stem cell, differentiated;NeuralProgenitors.day22.
cell type: ES-derived neural precursor cells.
cell type: induced pluripotent stem cell, differentiated;NeuralProgenitors.day22.
cell type: induced pluripotent stem cell, differentiated;NeuralProgenitors.day23.
cell type: Neural progenitor cells.
DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation have been implicated in normal development and differentiation, but our knowledge about the genome-wide distribution of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) during cellular differentiation remains limited. Using in vitro model system of gradual differentiation of human embryonic stem (hES) cells into ventral midbrain-type neural precursor (NP) cells and terminally into dopamine (DA) neurons, we explored changes in 5mC or 5hmC patterns during lineage commitment. We used three techniques, 450K DNA methylation array, MBD-seq, and hMeDIP-seq, and found combination of these methods can provide comprehensive information on the genome-wide 5mC or 5hmC patterns. We observed dramatic changes of 5mC patterns during differentiation of hES cells into NP cells. Although genome-wide 5hmC distribution was more stable than 5mC, coding exons, CpG islands and shores showed dynamic 5hmC patterns during differentiation. In addition to the role of DNA methylation as a mechanism to initiating gene silencing, we also found DNA methylation as a locking system to maintain gene silencing. More than 1,000 genes including mesoderm development related genes acquired promoter methylation during neuronal differentiation even though they were already silenced in hES cells. Finally, we found that activated genes lost 5mC in transcription start site (TSS) but acquired 5hmC around TSS and gene body during differentiation. Our findings may provide clues for elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying lineage specific differentiation of pluripotent stem cells during human embryonic development.
DNA methylation changes in neuroblastoma, a clinically-heterogeneous pediatric tumor, have been described essentially in promoter regions. We analyzed the DNA methylome of neuroblastoma using high-density microarrays and observed differential methylation not only in promoters but also in intragenic and intergenic regions at both CpG and non-CpG sites. These epigenetic changes showed a non-random distribution relative functional chromatin domains, and targeted development and cancer-related genes, relevant for neuroblastoma pathogenesis. CCND1, a gene overexpressed in neuroblastoma, showed hypomethylation of gene-body and upstream regulatory regions. Furthermore, tumors with diverse clinical-risk showed clear differences affecting CpG and, remarkably, non-CpG sites. Non-CpG methylation was present in clinically-favorable tumors and affected genes such as ALK, where non-CpG methylation correlated with low gene expression. Finally, we identified CpG and non-CpG methylation signatures which correlated with patient’s age at time-points relevant for neuroblastoma clinical behavior, and targeted genes related to neural development and neural crest regulatory network.
Dynamic changes of DNA methylome and hydroxymethylome during neural differentiation of hES cell (hMeDIP-Seq and MBD-Seq).
ES-derived neural precursor cells.
Examination of hMeDIP-Seq and MBD-Seq in 3 cell types (human embryonic stem, neural precursor, and dopamine neuron cells).
H9 ES-derived neural precursor cells 1.
H9 ES-derived neural precursor cells 2.
Neural progenitor cells differentiated from hIPSCs.
Pilocytic astrocytomas (PA) are the most common brain tumor in pediatric patients and can cause significant morbidity, including chronic neurological deficiencies. They are characterized by activating alterations in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, but little else is known about their development. To map the global DNA methylation profiles of these tumors, we analysed 61 PAs and 6 normal cerebellum samples using Illumina's Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips.  These data revealed two subgroups of PA that separate according to tumor location (infratentorial versus supratentorial), and identified key neural developmental genes that are differentially methylated between the two groups. Integration with transcriptome microarray data highlighted significant expression differences, which were unexpectedly associated with a strong positive correlation between methylation and expression. Differentially methylated probes were often identified within the gene body and/or regions up- or downstream of the gene, rather than at the transcription start site. We also identified a large number of differentially methylated genes between cerebellar PAs and normal cerebellum, which included additional developmental genes.
The presence of an extra whole or part of chromosome 21 in people with Down syndrome (DS) is associated with multiple neurological changes, including pathological aging that often meets the criteria for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). While the mechanism underlying these changes is unknown, it has been hypothesized that the presence of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) on chromosome 21 may contribute to the  phenotype. Genome-wide DNA methylation abnormalities have been shown in neural tissue of patients with AD, and cells may respond to changes in gene dosage with altered DNA methylation. We therefore examined whole-genome DNA methylation in buccal epithelial cells of adults with DS to determine whether patterns of DNA methylation correlated with DS and/or cognitive impairment. In addition we examined DNA methylation at the APP gene itself, to see whether there were changes in DNA methylation in this population. Using the Illumina 450K Human Methylation Array, we examined more than 485,000 CpG sites distributed across the genome in buccal epithelial cells. We found 297 CpGs to be differentially methylated between the groups, including 26 genes that were represented by more than one CpG. In addition, we found 331 probes that were correlated with cognitive function including 23 genes represented by more than one probe. We found no enrichment on chromosome 21 and targeted analysis of the APP gene revealed weak evidence for epigenetic impacts related to the AD phenotype. Overall, our results indicate that both Trisomy 21 and cognitive impairment are associated with distinct patterns of DNA methylation.
We generated illumina 450k DNA methylation data for a total of 9 sample groups with two biological replicates for each group.   Data for 4/9 groups were generated from glucosylated and bisulfite converted DNA, from human induced plurupotent stem cells (hIPSCs), differentiated cardiovascular progenitors (CVPs), differentiated neural progenitors (NPCs), and fibroblasts. Data for the next 4/9 groups were generated from glucosylated, TET-oxidized and bisulfite converted DNA, from and included replicates of hIPSCs, CVPs, NPCs, and fibroblasts.  Data for the last group was generated  from standard bisulfite converted DNA (not glucosylated) from fibroblasts.