term: cell
desc: A material entity of anatomical origin (part of or deriving from an organism) that has as its parts a maximally connected cell compartment surrounded by a plasma membrane.

term: primary cultured cell
desc: A cultured cell that is freshly isolated from a organismal source, or derives in culture from such a cell prior to the culture being passaged.

term: obsolete immortal cell line cell
desc: OBSOLETE: A cell line cell that is expected to be capable of an unlimited number of divisions, and is thus able to support indefinite growth/propagation in vitro as part of a immortal cell line.

term: native cell
desc: A cell that is found in a natural setting, which includes multicellular organism cells 'in vivo' (i.e. part of an organism), and unicellular organisms 'in environment' (i.e. part of a natural environment).

term: obsolete cell by organism
desc: OBSOLETE: A classification of cells by the organisms within which they are contained.

term: fibroblast neural crest derived
desc: 

term: neuronal receptor cell
desc: 

term: early embryonic cell
desc: A cell found in the embryo before the formation of all the gem layers is complete.

term: migratory cranial neural crest cell
desc: 

term: obsolete fusiform initial
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000079 from Plant Ontology instead. An elongated cell with approximately wedge-shaped ends, found in the vascular cambium, which gives rise to the elements of the axial system in the secondary vascular tissues.

term: cultured cell
desc: A cell in vitro that is or has been maintained or propagated as part of a cell culture.

term: migratory trunk neural crest cell
desc: 

term: obsolete cell by class
desc: 

term: obsolete dentine secreting cell
desc: 

term: germ line stem cell
desc: 

term: male germ cell
desc: 

term: male germ line stem cell
desc: 

term: spermatocyte
desc: A male germ cell that develops from spermatogonia. The euploid primary spermatocytes undergo meiosis and give rise to the haploid secondary spermatocytes which in turn give rise to spermatids.

term: spermatid
desc: A male germ cell that develops from the haploid secondary spermatocytes. Without further division, spermatids undergo structural changes and give rise to spermatozoa.

term: sperm
desc: A mature male germ cell that develops from a spermatid.

term: spermatogonium
desc: An euploid male germ cell of an early stage of spermatogenesis.

term: female germ cell
desc: Female germ cell is a germ cell that supports female gamete production.

term: female germ line stem cell
desc: 

term: oocyte
desc: A female germ cell that has entered meiosis.

term: oogonial cell
desc: An undifferentiated germ cell that proliferates rapidly and gives rise to oocytes.

term: egg cell
desc: A female gamete where meiosis has progressed to metaphase II and is able to participate in fertilization.

term: invertebrate nurse cell
desc: A germline cell that contributes to the development of the oocyte by transferring cytoplasm directly to oocyte.

term: smooth muscle cell neural crest derived
desc: 

term: CNS neuron (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: neuron neural crest derived
desc: 

term: glioblast
desc: 

term: neuroblast
desc: A cell that will develop into a neuron often after a migration phase.

term: neuroplacodal cell
desc: A cell of a platelike structure, especially a thickened plate of ectoderm in the early embryo, from which a sense organ develops.

term: apocrine cell
desc: An apocrine cell is a secretory cell characterized loss of part of the cytoplasm during the process of secretion - secretions are budded off through the plasma membrane producing membrane bound vesicles containing the secreted substance.

term: stem cell
desc: A relatively undifferentiated cell that retains the ability to divide and proliferate throughout life to provide progenitor cells that can differentiate into specialized cells.

term: single fate stem cell
desc: A stem cell that self-renews as well as give rise to a single mature cell type.

term: epithelial fate stem cell
desc: 

term: hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A stem cell from which all cells of the lymphoid and myeloid lineages develop, including blood cells and cells of the immune system. Hematopoietic stem cells lack cell markers of effector cells (lin-negative). Lin-negative is defined by lacking one or more of the following cell surface markers: CD2, CD3 epsilon, CD4, CD5 ,CD8 alpha chain, CD11b, CD14, CD19, CD20, CD56, ly6G, ter119.

term: erythroid progenitor cell
desc: A progenitor cell committed to the erythroid lineage.

term: germ line cell
desc: A cell that is within the developmental lineage of gametes and is able to pass along its genetic material to offspring.

term: monoblast
desc: A myeloid progenitor cell committed to the monocyte lineage. This cell is CD11b-positive, has basophilic cytoplasm, euchromatin, and the presence of a nucleolus.

term: mature eosinophil
desc: A fully differentiated eosinophil, a granular leukocyte with a nucleus that usually has two lobes connected by one or more slender threads, and cytoplasm containing coarse, round granules that are uniform in size and which can be stained by the dye eosin. Cells are also differentiated from other granulocytes by a small nuclear-to-cytoplasm ratio (1:3). This cell type is CD49d-positive.

term: neutrophilic myeloblast
desc: A myeloblast committed to the neutrophil lineage. This cell type is GATA-1 positive, C/EBPa-positive, AML-1-positive, c-myb-positive and has low expression of PU.1 transcription factor.

term: mature basophil
desc: A fully differentiated basophil, a granular leukocyte with an irregularly shaped, pale-staining nucleus that is partially constricted into two lobes, and with cytoplasm that contains coarse granules of variable size. Basophils contain vasoactive amines such as histamine and serotonin, which are released on appropriate stimulation.

term: obsolete thymus processed stem cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: obsolete bursa processed stem cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: neuronal stem cell
desc: Neural stem cell is characterized as an undifferentiated cell that originates from the neuroectoderm and has the capacity both to perpetually self-renew without differentiating and to generate multiple types of lineage-restricted progenitors.

term: multi fate stem cell
desc: A stem cell that can give rise to multiple lineages of cells.

term: common myeloid progenitor
desc: A progenitor cell committed to myeloid lineage, including the megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages.

term: megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor cell
desc: A progenitor cell committed to the megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages.

term: common lymphoid progenitor
desc: A oligopotent progenitor cell committed to the lymphoid lineage.

term: totipotent stem cell
desc: A stem cell from which all cells of the body can form.

term: bone matrix secreting cell
desc: 

term: non-terminally differentiated cell
desc: A precursor cell with a limited number of potential fates.

term: myoblast
desc: A cell that is commited to differentiating into a muscle cell.  Embryonic myoblasts develop from the mesoderm. They undergo proliferation, migrate to their various sites, and then differentiate into the appropriate form of myocytes.  Myoblasts also occur as transient populations of cells in muscles undergoing repair.

term: fibroblast
desc: A connective tissue cell which secretes an extracellular matrix rich in collagen and other macromolecules. Flattened and irregular in outline with branching processes; appear fusiform or spindle-shaped.

term: chondroblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that is typically non-terminally differentiated, secretes an avascular, GAG rich matrix; is not buried in cartilage tissue matrix, retains the ability to divide, located adjacent to cartilage tissue (including within the perichondrium), and develops from prechondroblast (and thus prechondrogenic) cell.

term: ameloblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that produces enamel, overlies the odontogenic papilla, and arises from the differentiation of a preameloblast cell.

term: odontoblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that secretes dentine matrix, is derived from the odontogenic papilla, and develops from a preodontoblast cell.

term: cementoblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that produces cementum (a bony substance that covers the root of a tooth), is part of the odontogenic papilla, and develops from a precementoblast cell.

term: osteoblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that secretes osteoid, is capable of producing mineralized (hydroxyapatite) matrix, is located adjacent to or within osteoid tissue, and arises from the transformation of a preosteoblast cell.

term: obsolete cell by histology
desc: OBSOLETE: A classification of cells by their microscopic appearance.

term: ciliated cell
desc: A cell that has a filiform extrusion of the cell surface.

term: ependymal cell
desc: A neurectoderm derived cell that lines the neural lumen.

term: epithelial cell
desc: A cell that is usually found in a two-dimensional sheet with a free surface. The cell has a cytoskeleton that allows for tight cell to cell contact and for cell polarity where apical part is directed towards the lumen and the basal part to the basal lamina.

term: ciliated epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell that has a cillia.

term: duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: branched duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: obsolete epithelial cell of gland
desc: 

term: blood vessel endothelial cell
desc: An endothelial cell that lines the vasculature.

term: non-branched duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: barrier epithelial cell
desc: 

term: obsolete epithem cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000066 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell that constitutes the mesophyll of a hydathode and is located between the xylem endings and the epidermis. Proposed to be involved in the retrieval of solutes from the xylem sap.

term: columnar/cuboidal epithelial cell
desc: 

term: squamous epithelial cell
desc: 

term: mesothelial cell
desc: A flattened epithelial cell of mesenchymal origin that lines the serous cavity.

term: peridermal cell
desc: 

term: stratified epithelial cell
desc: 

term: circulating cell
desc: A cell which moves among different tissues of the body, via blood, lymph, or other medium.

term: blood cell
desc: A cell found predominately in the blood.

term: epithelial cell of lung
desc: 

term: epithelial cell of pancreas
desc: An epithelial cell of the pancreas.

term: T cell
desc: A type of lymphocyte whose defining characteristic is the expression of a T cell receptor complex.

term: germ line stem cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: 

term: germ line stem cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: male germ line stem cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: female germ line stem cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: male germ line stem cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: 

term: female germ line stem cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: 

term: Kupffer cell
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage of the reticuloendothelial system found on the luminal surface of the hepatic sinusoids involved in erythrocyte clearance. Markers include F4/80+, CD11b-low, CD68-positive, sialoadhesin-positive, CD163/SRCR-positive. Irregular, with long processes including lamellipodia extending into the sinusoid lumen, have flattened nucleus with cytoplasm containing characteristic invaginations of the plasma membrane (vermiform bodies); lie within the sinusoid lumen attached to the endothelial surface; derived from the bone marrow, form a major part of the body's mononuclear phagocyte system.

term: osteoclast
desc: A specialized phagocytic cell associated with the absorption and removal of the mineralized matrix of bone tissue, which typically differentiates from monocytes. This cell has the following markers: tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase type 5-positive, PU.1-positive, c-fos-positive, nuclear factor NF-kappa-B p100 subunit-positive, tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 11A-positive and macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor-positive.

term: obsolete osteochondroclast
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: granulocyte
desc: A leukocyte with abundant granules in the cytoplasm.

term: neuron associated cell
desc: 

term: mature neutrophil
desc: A fully differentiated neutrophil, a granular leukocyte having a nucleus with three to five lobes connected by slender threads, and cytoplasm containing fine inconspicuous granules and stainable by neutral dyes. They are produced in bone marrow at a rate of 5e10-10e10/day and have a half-life of 6-8 hours. Neutrophils are CD15-positive, CD16-positive, CD32-positive, CD43-positive, CD181-positive, and CD182-positive.

term: mast cell
desc: A cell that is found in almost all tissues containing numerous basophilic granules and capable of releasing large amounts of histamine and heparin upon activation. Progenitors leave bone marrow and mature in connective and mucosal tissue. Mature mast cells are found in all tissues, except the bloodstream. Their phenotype is CD117-high, CD123-negative, CD193-positive, CD200R3-positive, and FceRI-high. Stem-cell factor (KIT-ligand; SCF) is the main controlling signal of their survival and development.

term: sensory epithelial cell
desc: A specialized epithelial cell involved in sensory perception. Restricted to special sense organs of the olfactory, gustatory, and vestibulocochlear receptor systems; contain sensory cells surrounded by supportive, non-receptive cells.

term: interneuron
desc: Most generally any neuron which is not motor or sensory. Interneurons may also refer to neurons whose axons remain within a particular brain region as contrasted with projection neurons which have axons projecting to other brain regions.

term: motor neuron
desc: An efferent neuron that passes from the central nervous system or a ganglion toward or to a muscle and conducts an impulse that causes or inhibits movement.

term: sensory neuron
desc: Any neuron having a sensory function; an afferent neuron conveying sensory impulses.

term: polymodal neuron
desc: 

term: bipolar neuron
desc: A type of interneuron that has two neurites, usually an axon and a dendrite, extending from opposite poles of an ovoid cell body.

term: multipolar neuron
desc: Neuron with an axon and two or more dendrites.

term: pseudounipolar neuron
desc: Neuron with two neurites that are fused grossly when they protrude from the soma and bifurcate a short distance from the soma.

term: unipolar neuron
desc: Neuron with one neurite that extends from the cell body.

term: autonomic neuron
desc: A neruon whose cell body is within an autonomic ganglion.

term: cholinergic neuron
desc: A neuron that uses acetylcholine as a vesicular neurotransmitter.

term: adrenergic neuron
desc: 

term: peptidergic neuron
desc: 

term: peripheral neuron
desc: A neuron that is part of nerve found outside the central nervous system.

term: columnar neuron
desc: 

term: mononuclear phagocyte
desc: A vertebrate phagocyte with a single nucleus.

term: surface ectodermal cell
desc: 

term: endothelial cell
desc: An endothelial cell comprises the outermost layer or lining of anatomical structures and can be squamous or cuboidal. In mammals, endothelial cell has vimentin filaments and is derived from the mesoderm.

term: pioneer neuron
desc: Pioneer neurons establish a pathway in the developing central nervous system and then undergo programmed cell death once the adult axons, which follow them, have made connections with the target site. Thus, they are a transient cell type involved in axon guidance.

term: CNS neuron (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: 

term: basket cell
desc: 

term: cerebellar Golgi cell
desc: Large intrinsic neuron located in the granule layer of the cerebellar cortex that extends its dendrites into the molecular layer where they receive contact from parallel fibers. The axon of the Golgi cell enters ramifies densely in the granule layer and enters into a complex arrangement with mossy fiber terminals and granule cell dendrites to form the cerebellar glomerulus. Llinas, Walton and Lang. In The Synaptic Organization of the Brain. 5th ed. 2004.

term: granule cell
desc: 

term: Purkinje cell
desc: The output neuron of the cerebellar cortex.

term: stellate neuron
desc: 

term: neuron associated cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: 

term: glial cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: glial cell
desc: A non-neuronal cell of the nervous system. They not only provide physical support, but also respond to injury, regulate the ionic and chemical composition of the extracellular milieu. Guide neuronal migration during development, and exchange metabolites with neurons.

term: macroglial cell
desc: A neuroglial cell of ectodermal origin, i.e., the astrocytes and oligodendrocytes considered together.

term: astrocyte
desc: A class of large neuroglial (macroglial) cells in the central nervous system - the largest and most numerous neuroglial cells in the brain and spinal cord. Astrocytes (from 'star' cells) are irregularly shaped with many long processes, including those with 'end feet' which form the glial (limiting) membrane and directly and indirectly contribute to the blood-brain barrier. They regulate the extracellular ionic and chemical environment, and 'reactive astrocytes' (along with microglia) respond to injury.

term: oligodendrocyte
desc: A class of large neuroglial (macroglial) cells in the central nervous system. Form the insulating myelin sheath of axons in the central nervous system.

term: microglial cell
desc: A central nervous system macrophage found in the parenchyma of the central nervous system. Marker include CD11b-positive, F4/80-positive, and CD68-positive.

term: neuron associated cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: gut endothelial cell
desc: 

term: corneal endothelial cell
desc: Cell of the single layer of large flattened cells covering the surface of the cornea.

term: neurectodermal cell
desc: Ectoderm destined to be nervous tissue.

term: mesenchymal stem cell
desc: A connective tissue cell that normally gives rise to other cells that are organized as three-dimensional masses. This cell type is CD73-positive, CD90-positive, CD105-positive, CD45-negative, CD34-negative, and MHCII-negative. They may further differentiate into osteoblasts, adipocytes, myocytes, neurons, or chondroblasts in vitro. Originally described as residing in the bone marrow, this cell type is now known to reside in many, if not all, adult organs.

term: fibrocyte
desc: An inactive fibroblast; cytoplasm is sparse, endoplasmic reticulum is scanty with flattened nucleus. Term used by some histologists; when fibroblasts become relatively inactive in fiber formation. However, this cell has the potential for fibrogenesis in quiescent connective tissue of the adult, as well as during development, other histologists prefer to use the term fibroblast in all circumstances. These cells represent ~0.5% of peripheral blood leukocytes.

term: fat cell
desc: A fat-storing cell found mostly in the abdominal cavity and subcutaneous tissue of mammals. Fat is usually stored in the form of triglycerides.

term: osteocyte
desc: A mature osteoblast that has become embedded in the bone matrix. They occupy a small cavity, called lacuna, in the matrix and are connected to adjacent osteocytes via protoplasmic projections called canaliculi.

term: chondrocyte
desc: Skeletogenic cell that is terminally differentiated, secretes an avascular, GAG-rich matrix, is embedded in cartilage tissue matrix, retains the ability to divide, and develops from a chondroblast cell.

term: odontocyte
desc: Skeletogenic cell that secretes dentine matrix, is derived from odontogenic papilla. Embedded in dentine tissue, and is the transformation of a non-terminally differentiated odontoblast cell.

term: cementocyte
desc: An osteocytelike cell with numerous processes, trapped in a lacuna in the cement of the tooth.

term: hyalocyte
desc: A cell occurring in the peripheral part of the vitreous body of the eye that may be responsible for production of hyaluronic acid and collagen.

term: guidepost cell
desc: 

term: obsolete cell by function
desc: OBSOLETE: A classification of cells by their primary end goal or behavior.

term: professional antigen presenting cell
desc: A cell capable of processing and presenting lipid and protein antigens to T cells in order to initiate an immune response.

term: simple columnar epithelial cell
desc: 

term: pigment cell
desc: A pigment cell is a cell that contains pigment granules.

term: melanocyte
desc: A pigment cell derived from the neural crest. Contains melanin-filled pigment granules, which gives a brown to black appearance.

term: visual pigment cell
desc: 

term: glandular epithelial cell
desc: A specialized epithelial cell that is capable of synthesizing and secreting certain biomolecules.

term: secretory cell
desc: A cell that specializes in controlled release of one or more substances.

term: exocrine cell
desc: A cell of an exocrine gland; i.e. a gland that discharges its secretion via a duct.

term: glycosaminoglycan secreting cell
desc: A cell that secretes glycosaminoglycans.

term: protein secreting cell
desc: 

term: peptic cell
desc: A cell that is usually basal in position, cuboidal with round nucleus, short microvilli, secretes pepsinogen.

term: obsolete antibody secreting cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE: A cell of the lymphoid series that can react with antigen to produce specific cell products called antibodies. Various cell subpopulations, often B cells, can be defined, based on the different classes of immunoglobulins that they synthesize.']

term: surfactant secreting cell
desc: A cell that specializes in secretion of surfactant in the alveoli of the lung.

term: Clara cell
desc: Epithelial progenitor cell of the lung. Clara cells are dome-shaped with short microvilli but no cilia. They function to protect the bronchiolar epithelium. Clara cells also multiply and differentiate into ciliated cells to regenerate the bronchiolar epithelium.

term: seromucus secreting cell
desc: 

term: goblet cell
desc: A cell of the epithelial lining that produce and secrete mucins.

term: acid secreting cell
desc: 

term: parietal cell
desc: A large, oval stomach epithelial cell with a central nucleus; source of gastric acid. Secretes HCl.

term: endocrine cell
desc: A cell of an endocrine gland, ductless glands that secrete substances which are released directly into the circulation and which influence metabolism and other body functions.

term: enteroendocrine cell
desc: An endocrine cell that is located in the epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract or in the pancreas.

term: neuroendocrine cell
desc: An endocrine cell that has the specialized function to produce and secrete hormones in response to neuronal signals.

term: chromaffin cell
desc: A cell that stores epinephrine secretory vesicles. During times of stress, the nervous system signals the vesicles to secrete their hormonal content. Their name derives from their ability to stain a brownish color with chromic salts. Characteristically, they are located in the adrenal medulla and paraganglia of the sympathetic nervous system.

term: peptide hormone secreting cell
desc: 

term: insulin secreting cell
desc: 

term: type B pancreatic cell
desc: A cell that secretes insulin and is located towards the center of the islets of Langerhans.

term: glucagon secreting cell
desc: A cell that secretes glucagon.

term: pancreatic A cell
desc: A type of enteocrine cell found in the periphery of the islets of Langerhans that secretes glucagon.

term: somatostatin secreting cell
desc: 

term: pancreatic D cell
desc: A D cell located in the pancreas. Peripherally placed within the islets like type A cells; contains somatostatin.

term: steroid hormone secreting cell
desc: 

term: luteal cell
desc: A progesterone secreting cell in the corpus luteum. The large luteal cells develop from the granulosa cells. The small luteal cells develop from the theca cells.

term: ecdysteroid secreting cell
desc: 

term: testosterone secreting cell
desc: 

term: Leydig cell
desc: A Leydig cell is a testosterone-secreting cell in the interstitial area, between the seminiferous tubules, in the testis.

term: progesterone secreting cell
desc: 

term: estradiol secreting cell
desc: 

term: metabolising cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is intermediary metabolism.

term: hepatocyte
desc: The main structural component of the liver. They are specialized epithelial cells that are organized into interconnected plates called lobules. Majority of cell population of liver, polygonal in shape, arranged in plates or trabeculae between sinusoids; may have single nucleus or binucleated.

term: contractile cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is to shorten.

term: myoepithelial cell
desc: Contractile cells resembling smooth muscle cells that are present in glands, notably the mammary gland, and aid in secretion. This cell has long weaving dendritic processes containing myofilament.

term: myofibroblast cell
desc: An animal cell that has characteristics of both a fibroblast cell and a smooth muscle cell.

term: muscle cell
desc: A mature contractile cell, commonly known as a myocyte. This cell has as part of its cytoplasm myofibrils organized in various patterns.

term: cell of skeletal muscle
desc: A somatic cell located in skeletal muscle.

term: slow muscle cell
desc: A muscle cell that develops tension more slowly than a fast-twitch fiber.

term: fast muscle cell
desc: A muscle cell that can develop high tension rapidly. It is usually innervated by a single alpha neuron .

term: smooth muscle cell
desc: A non-striated, elongated, spindle-shaped cell found lining the digestive tract, uterus, and blood vessels. They develop from specialized myoblasts (smooth muscle myoblast).

term: cardiac muscle cell (sensu Arthopoda)
desc: A striated muscle cell of an arthropod heart that participates in heart contraction.

term: obsolete nodal cardiac cell
desc: 

term: obsolete Purkinje fiber
desc: 

term: flight muscle cell
desc: 

term: receptor cell
desc: 

term: pain receptor cell
desc: The peripheral receptor for pain. Includes receptors which are sensitive to painful mechanical stimuli, extreme heat or cold, and chemical stimuli. All mammalian nociceptors are free nerve endings.

term: mechanoreceptor cell
desc: A cell specialized to transduce mechanical stimuli and relay that information centrally in the nervous system.

term: touch receptor cell
desc: 

term: auditory hair cell
desc: A mechanoreceptor cell located in the inner ear that is sensitive to auditory stimuli. The accessory sensory structures are arranged so that appropriate stimuli cause movement of the hair-like projections (stereocilia and kinocilia) which relay the information centrally in the nervous system.

term: gravity sensitive cell
desc: 

term: acceleration receptive cell
desc: 

term: thermoreceptor cell
desc: A cellular receptor which mediates the sense of temperature. Thermoreceptor cells in vertebrates are mostly located under the skin. In mammals there are separate types of thermoreceptors for cold and for warmth and pain receptor cells which detect cold or heat extreme enough to cause pain.

term: chemoreceptor cell
desc: A cell specialized to detect chemical substances and relay that information centrally in the nervous system. Chemoreceptors may monitor external stimuli, as in taste and olfaction, or internal stimuli, such as the concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood.

term: olfactory receptor cell
desc: 

term: pH receptor cell
desc: 

term: taste receptor cell
desc: A cell type found in the spherical or ovoid clusters of receptor cells found mainly in the epithelium of the tongue and constituting the end organs of the sense of taste.

term: photoreceptor cell
desc: A cell specialized to detect and transduce light.

term: electrically active cell
desc: A cell whose function is determined by the generation or the reception of an electric signal.

term: absorptive cell
desc: A cell that takes up and metabolizes substances.

term: lining cell
desc: A cell within an epithelial cell sheet whose main function is to act as an internal or external covering for a tissue or an organism.

term: synovial cell
desc: A meso-epithelial cell that lies between the cartilaginous fibers in the synovial membrane of a joint and produces hyaluronic acid.

term: barrier cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is to prevent the transport of stuff across compartments.

term: Sertoli cell
desc: A supporting cell projecting inward from the basement membrane of seminiferous tubules. They surround and nourish the developing male germ cells and secrete androgen binding protein. Their tight junctions with the spermatogonia and spermatocytes provide a blood-testis barrier.

term: insulating cell
desc: 

term: myelinating Schwann cell
desc: A neuroglial cell of the peripheral nervous system which forms the insulating myelin sheaths of peripheral axons.

term: motile cell
desc: A cell that moves by its own activities.

term: obsolete cell by lineage
desc: 

term: ectodermal cell
desc: A cell of the outer of the three germ layers of the embryo.

term: mesodermal cell
desc: A cell of the middle germ layer of the embryo.

term: endodermal cell
desc: A cell of the inner of the three germ layers of the embryo.

term: obsolete cell by nuclear number
desc: OBSOLETE: A classification of cells by the number of their nuclei.

term: anucleate cell
desc: A cell that lacks a nucleus.

term: single nucleate cell
desc: A cell with a single nucleus.

term: binucleate cell
desc: 

term: multinucleate cell
desc: A cell with more than one nucleus.

term: obsolete lymphoblast
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: obsolete T lymphoblast
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: obsolete B lymphoblast
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: erythrocyte
desc: A red blood cell. In mammals, mature erythrocytes are biconcave disks containing hemoglobin whose function is to transport oxygen.

term: platelet
desc: A non-nucleated disk-shaped cell formed by extrusion from megakaryocytes, found in the blood of all mammals, and mainly involved in blood coagulation.

term: phagocyte
desc: Any cell capable of ingesting particulate matter via phagocytosis.

term: macrophage
desc: A mononuclear phagocyte present in variety of tissues, typically differentiated from monocytes, capable of phagocytosing a variety of extracellular particulate material, including immune complexes, microorganisms, and dead cells.

term: B cell
desc: A lymphocyte of B lineage with the phenotype CD19-positive, CD20-positive, and capable of B cell mediated immunity.

term: keratinizing barrier epithelial cell
desc: 

term: non keratinizing barrier epithelial cell
desc: 

term: brush border epithelial cell
desc: 

term: stratified squamous epithelial cell
desc: 

term: stratified cuboidal epithelial cell
desc: 

term: Merkel cell
desc: A modified epidermal cell located in the stratum basale. They are found mostly in areas where sensory perception is acute. Merkel cells are closely associated with an expanded terminal bulb of an afferent myelinated nerve fiber.

term: glial cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: A non-neuronal cell of the nervous system. They not only provide physical support, but also respond to injury, regulate the ionic and chemical composition of the extracellular milieu. Form the myelin insulation of nervous pathways, guide neuronal migration during development, and exchange metabolites with neurons. Neuroglia have high-affinity transmitter uptake systems, voltage-dependent and transmitter-gated ion channels, and can release transmitters, but their role in signaling (as in many other functions) is unclear.

term: transitional epithelial cell
desc: A cell characteristically found lining hollow organs that are subject to great mechanical change due to contraction and distention; originally thought to represent a transition between stratified squamous and columnar epithelium.

term: obsolete passage cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000353 from Plant Ontology instead. Cell in exodermis or endodermis that remains thin walled when the associated cells develop thick secondary walls. Has casparian strip in endodermis.

term: Mauthner neuron
desc: 

term: Rohon-Beard neuron
desc: Type of neuron that is a primary mechanosensory cell, with peripheral neurites innervating the skin with free nerve endings.

term: obsolete microsporocyte
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020047 from Plant Ontology instead. A diploid (2n) cell that undergoes meiosis and forms four haploid (1n) microspores; also called microspore mother cell and, in seed plants, pollen mother cell.

term: hatching gland cell
desc: 

term: obsolete megaspore
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020019 from Plant Ontology instead. A haploid (1n) spore developing into a female gametophyte in heterosporous plants.

term: extramedullary cell
desc: 

term: obsolete microspore
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020048 from Plant Ontology instead. A haploid (1n) spore developing into a male gametophyte in heterosporous plants; the uninucleate pollen grain in seed plants.

term: eurydendroid cell
desc: 

term: obsolete egg cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020094 from Plant Ontology instead. The female gamete of plants.

term: eukaryotic cell
desc: 

term: uric acid accumulating cell
desc: 

term: Mycetozoan cell
desc: 

term: obsolete fiber tracheid
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000355 from Plant Ontology instead. A fiber like tracheid in the secondary xylem; commonly thick walled, with pointed ends and bordered pits that have lenticular to slit like apertures.

term: obsolete aggregate cell
desc: 

term: obsolete mucilage cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000373 from Plant Ontology instead. Cell containing mucilages or gums or similar carbohydrate material characterized by the property of swelling in water.

term: anterior cell
desc: 

term: obsolete guard mother cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000351 from Plant Ontology instead. An epidermal cell that divides to produce the guard cells.

term: obsolete vegetative cell (sensu Mycetozoa)
desc: 

term: obsolete phloem initial
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000400 from Plant Ontology instead. A cambial cell on the phloem side of the cambial zone that is the source of one or more cells arising by periclinal divisions and differentiating into phloem elements with or without additional divisions in various planes.

term: obsolete anterior like cell
desc: 

term: obsolete meristemoid
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0004011 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell constituting an active locus of meristematic activity in a tissue composed of somewhat older, differentiating cells.

term: obsolete prespore cell
desc: 

term: obsolete sieve element
desc: Obsolete. Consult Plant Ontology instead. The cell in the phloem tissue concerned with mainly longitudinal conduction of food materials. Classified into sieve cell and sieve tube member.

term: obsolete prestalk cell
desc: 

term: obsolete subsidiary cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000284 from Plant Ontology instead. An epidermal cell associated with a stoma and at least morphologically distinguishable from the epidermal cells composing the groundmass of the tissue.

term: obsolete prestalk A cell
desc: 

term: obsolete cambial initial
desc: OBSOLETE, use term from Plant Ontology. A cell localized in the vascular cambium or phellogen. Its periclinal division can contribute cells either to the outside or to the inside of the axis; in vascular cambium, classified into fusiform initials (source of axial cells of xylem and phloem) and ray initials (source of the ray cells).

term: obsolete prestalk AB cell
desc: 

term: obsolete prestalk B cell
desc: 

term: obsolete sclerenchyma cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000077 from Plant Ontology instead. Cell variable in form and size, being more or less thick, often lignified, secondary walls. Belongs to the category of subcells and may or may not be devoid of protoplast at maturity.

term: obsolete prestalk I cell
desc: OBSOLETE: Initial population of prestalk cells that activate the ecmA promoter at the mound stage and that presumably further differentiate into pstA and pstO cells.

term: obsolete central cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020090 from Plant Ontology instead. OBSOLETED, use term from Plant Ontology. A cell containing the two polar nuclei which, after double fertilization, will develop into the endosperm.

term: obsolete prestalk 0 cell
desc: 

term: obsolete generative cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020097 from Plant Ontology instead. The cell that will give rise to the generative nuclei which will participate in fertilization.

term: obsolete pstAB/ALC
desc: 

term: obsolete trichome
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000282 from Plant Ontology instead. An outgrowth from the epidermis. Trichomes vary in size and complexity and include hairs, scales, and other structures and may be glandular. In Arabidopsis, patterning of trichome development is not random but does not appear to be lineage-based like stomata.

term: obsolete pstO/ALC
desc: 

term: obsolete companion cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000071 from Plant Ontology instead. A specialized parenchyma cell associated with a sieve-tube member in angiosperm phloem and arising from the same mother cell as the sieve-tube member.

term: obsolete stalk cell
desc: 

term: hyphal cell
desc: A cell of a filament of a fungal mycelium.

term: eye photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: obsolete synergid
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000191 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell in the micropylar end of the embryo sac associated with the egg in the egg apparatus of angiosperms. Plays a vital role in fertilization.

term: obsolete chemotactic amoeboid cell (sensu Mycetozoa)
desc: 

term: obsolete xylem fiber cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000274 from Plant Ontology instead. A fiber of the xylem tissue, Two types are recognized in the secondary xylem: fiber tracheids and libriform fibers.

term: obsolete spore (sensu Mycetozoa)
desc: 

term: obsolete guard cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000293 from Plant Ontology instead. One of a pair of cells flanking the stomatal pore and causing the opening and closing of the pore by changes in turgor.

term: structural cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is to provide structural support, to provide strength and physical integrity to the organism.

term: obsolete sieve cell
desc: Obsolete. Consult Plant Ontology instead. A type of sieve element that has relatively undifferentiated sieve areas (with narrow pores), rather uniform in structure on all walls; that is, there are no sieve plates. Typical of gymnosperms and lower vascular plants.

term: somatotropin secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that produces growth hormone, somatotropin.

term: obsolete vegetative cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020099 from Plant Ontology instead. Cell type formed after the first mitotic division of the microgametophye, The nucleus of this cell migrates to the tip of the pollen tube after germination and disintegrates when the pollen tube penetrates the nucellus.

term: obsolete socket cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000115 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell that surrounds a trichome and provides support for the trichome.

term: obsolete xylem element
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000273 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell composing the xylem.

term: obsolete trichoblast
desc: OBSOLETED. Commonly used for a cell in root epidermis that gives rise to a root hair. The daughter cell produced by the asymmetric division of a root epidermal cell that gives rise to a root hair.

term: gamete
desc: A mature sexual reproductive cell having a single set of unpaired chromosomes.

term: pole cell
desc: 

term: obsolete IgM B cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: obsolete IgG B cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: obsolete IgA B cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: obsolete IgE B cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE (was not defined before being made obsolete).']

term: crystallin accumulating cell
desc: 

term: tracheal epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell found in the trachea.

term: metal ion accumulating cell
desc: 

term: copper accumulating cell
desc: 

term: iron accumulating cell
desc: 

term: keratin accumulating cell
desc: 

term: keratinocyte
desc: An epidermal cell which synthesizes keratin and undergoes a characteristic change as it moves upward from the basal layers of the epidermis to the cornified (horny) layer of the skin. Successive stages of differentiation of the keratinocytes forming the epidermal layers are basal cell, spinous or prickle cell, and the granular cell.

term: serous secreting cell
desc: Columnar glandular cell with irregular nucleus, copious granular endoplasmic reticulum and supranuclear granules. Secretes a watery fluid containing proteins known as serous fluid.

term: milk secreting cell
desc: 

term: tears secreting cell
desc: A cell secreting tears, the fluid secreted by the lacrimal glands. This fluid moistens the conjunctiva and cornea.

term: obsolete ray initial
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000082 from Plant Ontology instead. A meristemic ray cell in the vascular cambium that gives rise to ray cells of the secondary xylem and secondary phloem.

term: sebum secreting cell
desc: A cell secreting sebun, an oily substance secreted by sebaceous glands, composed of keratin, fat, and cellular debris.

term: sweat secreting cell
desc: A cell secreting sweat, the fluid excreted by the sweat glands of mammals. It consists of water containing sodium chloride, phosphate, urea, ammonia, and other waste products.

term: mucus secreting cell
desc: 

term: obsolete megasporocyte
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000431 from Plant Ontology instead. A diploid (2n) cell that undergoes meiosis and produces four haploid (1n) megaspores; also called megaspore mother cell.

term: seminal fluid secreting cell
desc: 

term: pneumocyte
desc: An epithelial cell that lines the peripheral gas exchange region of the lungs of air-breathing vertebrates.

term: lysozyme secreting cell
desc: 

term: metanephric mesenchyme stem cell
desc: 

term: stuff accumulating cell
desc: A cell that is specialised to accumulate a particular substance(s).

term: glycogen accumulating cell
desc: 

term: extracellular matrix secreting cell
desc: 

term: myelin accumulating cell
desc: 

term: oxygen accumulating cell
desc: 

term: obsolete collenchymal cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000075 from Plant Ontology instead. An elongated living cell with unevenly thickened nonlignified primary walls.

term: obsolete tracheid
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000301 from Plant Ontology instead. A tracheary element of the xylem that has no perforations, as contrasted with a vessel member. May occur in primary and in secondary xylem. May have any kind of secondary wall thickening found in tracheary elements.

term: obsolete atrichoblast
desc: OBSOLETE, use term from Plant Ontology. A cell formed after asymmetric division of root epidermal cell that does not give rise to a root hair.

term: migratory neural crest cell
desc: A cell derived from the specialized ectoderm flanking each side of the embryonic neural plate, which after the closure of the neural tube, forms masses of cells that migrate out from the dorsal aspect of the neural tube to spread throughout the body.

term: vegetative cell (sensu Fungi)
desc: 

term: mesenchyme condensation cell
desc: A mesenchymal cell in embryonic development found in a contracting mass and that gives rise to osteoprogenitors.

term: adrenal medulla chromaffin cell
desc: A cell found within the adrenal medulla that secrete biogenic amine hormones upon stimulation.

term: neuroblast (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: An embryonic cell that develops into a nerve cell or neuron.

term: neuroblast (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: glioblast (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: An early neural cell developing from the early ependymal cell of the neural tube.

term: glioblast (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: pigment cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: pigment cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: Any animal cell containing pigment granules.

term: visual pigment cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: A pigment cell that is capable of detecting light stimulus that is involved in visual perception.

term: obsolete non-visual cell (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: 

term: dental papilla cell
desc: A mesenchymal cell that is part of a small mass of condensed mesenchyme in the enamel organ; it differentiates into the dentin and dental pulp.

term: hair follicle dermal papilla cell
desc: A specialized mesenchymal cell that resides in the dermal papilla located at the bottom of hair follicles. This cell plays a pivotal roles in hair formation, growth, and cycling.

term: scleral cell
desc: A cell of the sclera of the eye.

term: choroidal cell of the eye
desc: A cell of the choroid of the eye.

term: extraembryonic cell
desc: 

term: amnioserosal cell
desc: 

term: trophoblast cell
desc: A cell lining the outside of the blastocyst. After binding to the endometrium, trophoblast cells develop into two distinct layers, an inner layer of mononuclear cytotrophoblast cells and an outer layer of continuous multinuclear cytoplasm, the syncytiotrophoblast cells, which form the early fetal-maternal interface.

term: epiblast cell
desc: A cell of the outer layer of a blastula that gives rise to the ectoderm after gastrulation.

term: blastoderm cell
desc: An undifferentiated cell produced by early cleavages of the fertilized egg (zygote).

term: blastemal cell
desc: 

term: multi-potent skeletal muscle stem cell
desc: A multifate stem cell found in skeletal muscle than can differentiate into many different cell types, including muscle. Distinct cell type from satellite cell.

term: hair matrix stem cell
desc: 

term: stratified epithelial stem cell
desc: 

term: sphincter associated smooth muscle cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of a sphincter. A sphincter is a typically circular muscle that normally maintains constriction of a natural body passage or orifice and which relaxes as required by normal physiological functioning.

term: vascular associated smooth muscle cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell assocatiated with the vasculature.

term: morula cell
desc: A cell of the early embryo at the developmental stage in which the blastomeres, resulting from repeated mitotic divisions of the fertilized ovum (zygote), form a compact cell mass.

term: gastrula cell
desc: A cell of the embryo in the early stage following the blastula, characterized by morphogenetic cell movements, cell differentiation, and the formation of the three germ layers.

term: epidermal cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the integument (the outer layer of an organism).

term: obsolete axial cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000081 from Plant Ontology instead. OBSOLETE, use term from the Plant Ontology. A secondary vascular cell that develops from the fusiform cambial initials and oriented with their longest diameter parallel with the main axis of stem or root. These cells make up the axial system, also known as vertical or longitudinal system.

term: obsolete ray cell
desc: Obsolete. Consult Plant Ontology. A cell that develops from the ray initial and composes all rays (panels of tissue variable in height and width, formed by the ray initials in the vascular cambium and extending radially in the secondary xylem and secondary phloem) in the secondary vascular tissues.

term: animal zygote
desc: Diploid cell produced by the fusion of sperm cell nucleus and egg cell.

term: obsolete sperm cell (sensu Viridiplantae)
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000084 from Plant Ontology instead. Male gamete, part of male germ unit.

term: sheath cell (sensu Nematoda)
desc: 

term: obsolete myrosin cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000352 from Plant Ontology instead. Cell containing glucosinolates ('mustard oil glucosides') and myrosinases, enzymes hydrolyzing the glucosinolates. Occurs in eleven dicotyledon families, the two largest of which are the Brassicaceae and Euphorbiaceae.

term: obsolete transfer cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000078 from Plant Ontology instead. Parenchyma cell with the wall ingrowth (or invaginations) that increase the surface of the plasmalemma. Appears to be specialized for short-distance transfer of solutes.

term: protoplast
desc: The cell protoplasm after removal of the cell wall.

term: tormogen cell
desc: An epidermal cell that is part of a cell cluster organ of the insect integument (such as a sensillum) and that secretes a cuticular specialization that forms a socket around the base of a cuticular specialization produced by a trichogen cell.

term: histoblast
desc: 

term: trichogen cell
desc: An epidermal cell that is part of a cell cluster organ of the insect integument (such as a sensillum) and that secretes a cuticular specialization, often in the form of a hair, bristle, peg or scale. The base of this specialization is often surrounded by a socket produced by a closely associated tormogen cell.

term: obsolete osteoprogenitor cell
desc: 

term: humidity receptor cell
desc: 

term: tracheoblast
desc: 

term: support cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: sensory processing neuron
desc: 

term: thecogen cell
desc: The support cell that makes the thecogen dendritic cap - a cuticle-like matrix around the tip of the eo-dendrite and which encloses the soma of the eo-neuron.

term: neurosecretory neuron
desc: 

term: scolopale cell
desc: 

term: nephrogenic mesenchyme stem cell
desc: 

term: ligament cell
desc: 

term: prohemocyte (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: attachment cell
desc: 

term: hemocyte (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: tendon cell
desc: An elongated fibrocyte that is part of a tendon. The cytoplasm is stretched between the collagen fibres of the tendon. They have a central cell nucleus with a prominent nucleolus. Tendon cells have a well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum and they are responsible for synthesis and turnover of tendon fibres and ground substance.

term: socket cell (sensu Nematoda)
desc: 

term: blood cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: podocyte (sensu Diptera)
desc: An insect immune cell that develops from plasmatocyte.

term: crystal cell
desc: 

term: electrically responsive cell
desc: A cell whose function is determined by its response to an electric signal.

term: plasmatocyte
desc: 

term: procrystal cell
desc: 

term: lamellocyte
desc: 

term: ganglion interneuron
desc: 

term: polygonal cell
desc: 

term: obsolete phloem element
desc: Obsolete. Consult Plant Ontology instead. OBSOLETED, not defined prior to obsoletion.

term: obsolete pavement cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000332 from Plant Ontology instead. An epidermal cell with a characteristic convoluted anticlinal cell wall that gives a jigsaw like appearance to the lamina.

term: macrophage (sensu Diptera)
desc: 

term: CNS interneuron
desc: 

term: electrically signaling cell
desc: A cell that initiates an electrical signal and passes that signal to another cell.

term: neuroepidermoblast
desc: 

term: CNS short range interneuron
desc: 

term: scolopidial ligament cell
desc: 

term: male gamete
desc: 

term: scolopidial sheath cell
desc: 

term: CNS long range interneuron
desc: 

term: flatworm hypodermal cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the hypodermis of flatworms.

term: polyploid cell
desc: A cell whose nucleus, or nuclei, each contain more than two haploid genomes.

term: haploid cell
desc: A cell whose nucleus contains a single haploid genome.

term: obsolete cell by ploidy
desc: OBSOLETE: A classification of cells by the number of haploid genome equivalents of their nucleus or nuclei.

term: diploid cell
desc: A cell whose nucleus has two haploid genomes.

term: polytene cell
desc: 

term: endopolyploid cell
desc: 

term: arcade cell
desc: An epithelial cell found in C. elegans that firmly hold the outer body wall and the lips to the inner cylinder of the pharynx in a manner that keeps these organs from breaking apart, while still giving each organ freedom of movement during feeding.

term: seam cell
desc: An epithelial fate stem cell found in flatworms.

term: syncytial epithelial cell
desc: 

term: coelomocyte
desc: A free floating cell, including amebocytes and eleocytes, in the coelom of certain animals, especially annelids.

term: mitogenic signaling cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is to cause growth by stimulating cell division in its immediate cellular environment.

term: tip cell
desc: 

term: excretory cell
desc: A cell involved in the elimination of metabolic and foreign toxins, and in maintaining the ionic, acid-base and water balance of biological fluids.

term: pore cell
desc: Forms the terminal part of the cuticle-lined excretory duct of C. elegans.

term: scaffold cell
desc: 

term: GLR cell
desc: A scaffolding cell type found in C. elegans, this cell plays a supportive role to the muscle arms. May also have an endocrine role.

term: yolk cell
desc: 

term: imaginal disc cell
desc: 

term: xanthophore cell
desc: A pigment cell derived from the neural crest. Contains cartenoid pigments in structures called pterinosomes or xanthosomes. This gives an appearance ranging from a golden yellow to orange and red.

term: iridophore
desc: A pigment cell derived from the neural crest. The cell contains flat light-reflecting platelets, probably of guanine, in stacks called reflecting platets or iridisomes. The color-generating components produce a silver, gold, or iridescent color.

term: reticular cell
desc: Large, stellate fibroblast found along the network of collagen fibers of the reticulum of the spleen; synthesize the matrix components of the reticulum.

term: obsolete functional megaspore
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000244 from Plant Ontology instead. In monosporic and bisporic megasporogenesis: the megaspore(s) that will undergo megagametogenesis.

term: eccrine cell
desc: A secretory cell that discharges its product without loss of cytoplasm.

term: alkali secreting cell
desc: 

term: vaginal lubricant secreting cell
desc: 

term: gonadtroph
desc: A rounded cell that is usually situated next to sinusoids; secretes follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).

term: luteinizing hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell pituitary that produces luteinizing hormone.

term: prolactin secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone cell that secretes prolactin.

term: melanocyte stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A cell of the intermediate pituitary that produces melanocyte stimulating hormone.

term: follicle stem cell
desc: 

term: follicular dendritic cell
desc: A cell with extensive dendritic processes found in the B cell areas (primary follicles and germinal centers) of lymphoid tissue. They are unrelated to the dendritic cell associated with T cells. Follicular dendritic cells have Fc receptors and C3b receptors, but unlike other dendritic cells, they do not process or present antigen in a way that allows recognition by T cells. Instead, they hold antigen in the form of immune complexes on their surfaces for long periods and can present antigen to B cells during an immune response.

term: calcitonin secreting cell
desc: 

term: obliquely striated muscle cell
desc: A muscle cell in which the fibers are organised into sarcomeres but in which adjacent myofibrils are offset from each other, producing an oblique banding pattern.

term: apoptosis fated cell
desc: 

term: chief cell of parathyroid gland
desc: An epithelial cell of the parathyroid gland that is arranged in wide, irregular interconnecting columns; responsible for the synthesis and secretion of parathyroid hormone.

term: carbohydrate secreting cell
desc: 

term: white fat cell
desc: Fat cells with light coloration and few mitochondria. They contain a scant ring of cytoplasm surrounding a single large lipid droplet or vacuole.

term: brown fat cell
desc: A cell from the thermogenic form of adipose tissue found in many species,  particularly in newborns and hibernating mammals, but also in lesser amounts in adults of other mammals including humans. Brown fat is capable of rapid liberation of energy and seems to be important in the maintenance of body temperature immediately after birth and upon waking from hibernation.

term: dendritic cell
desc: A cell of hematopoietic origin, typically resident in particular tissues, specialized in the uptake, processing, and transport of antigens to lymph nodes for the purpose of stimulating an immune response via T cell activation. These cells are lineage negative (CD3-negative, CD19-negative, CD34-negative, and CD56-negative).

term: thyroid hormone secreting cell
desc: 

term: Langerhans cell
desc: Langerhans cell is a conventional dendritic cell that has plasma membrane part CD207. A Langerhans cell is a stellate dendritic cell of myeloid origin, that appears clear on light microscopy and has a dark-staining, indented nucleus and characteristic inclusions (Birbeck granules) in the cytoplasm; Langerhans cells are found principally in the stratum spinosum of the epidermis, but they also occur in other stratified epithelia and have been identified in the lung, lymph nodes, spleen, and thymus.

term: epinephrine secreting cell
desc: A cell capable of producing epinephrine. Epiniphrine is synthesized from norepiniphrine by the actions of the phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase enzyme, which is expressed in the adrenal glands, androgenic neurons, and in other cell types.

term: obsolete starch sheath cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0004531 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell characterized by conspicuous and rather stable accumulation of starch.

term: mineralocorticoid secreting cell
desc: 

term: biogenic amine secreting cell
desc: 

term: serotonin secreting cell
desc: A cell type that secretes 5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin).

term: noradrenergic cell
desc: A cell capable of producting norepiniphrine. Norepiniphrine is a catecholamine with multiple roles including as a hormone and a neurotransmitter. In addition, epiniphrine is synthesized from norepiniphrine by the actions of the phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase enzyme.

term: glucocorticoid secreting cell
desc: 

term: adepithelial cell
desc: 

term: epidermal cell (sensu arthropoda)
desc: An epidermal cell that secretes chitinous cuticle from its apical side.

term: epidermoblast
desc: An epidermal progenitor cell that arises from neuroectoderm and in turn gives rise to the epidermal sheath of ventral and cephalic regions.

term: cardioblast (sensu Arthropoda)
desc: 

term: adrenocorticotropic hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that produces adrenocorticotropin, or corticotropin.

term: neuroglioblast
desc: 

term: ganglion mother cell
desc: 

term: digestive enzyme secreting cell
desc: 

term: obsolete chlorenchyma cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000076 from Plant Ontology instead. OBSOLETE, use term from Plant Ontology. Parenchyma cells containing chloroplasts; a component of leaf mesophyll and other green parenchyma tissue.

term: defensive cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is to protect the organism.

term: pericardial nephrocyte
desc: an insect renal cell that filters hemolymph and is found with other pericardial nephrocytes in two rows flanking the dorsal vessel.

term: obsolete degenerate megaspore
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000245 from Plant Ontology instead. In monosporic and bisporic megasporogenesis: the megaspore(s) that do not participate in megagametogenesis.

term: thyrotroph
desc: A basophil cell of the anterior pituitary that produces thyroid stimulating hormone, thyrotrophin. This cell type is elongated, polygonal and lie in clusters towards the adenohypophyseal center.

term: follicle cell
desc: 

term: oxytocin stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes oxytocin stimulating hormone

term: vasopressin stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes vasopressin stimulating hormone

term: secretin stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes secretin stimulating hormone

term: cholecystokin stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes cholecystokin stimulating hormone

term: juvenile hormone secreting cell
desc: An endocrine cell that secretes juvenile hormone.

term: bombesin stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes cholecystokin stimulating hormone

term: connective tissue type mast cell
desc: Mast cell subtype whose granules contain both the serine proteases tryptase and chymase. These cells are primarily found in connective tissue, such as the peritoneal cavity, skin, and intestinal submucosa. Their development is T-cell independent.

term: mucosal type mast cell
desc: Mast cell subtype that contains only the serine protease trypase in its granules. These cells are primarily found in mucosal tissue, such as intestinal mucosa and alveoli. They depend upon T-cells for development of phenotype.

term: garland cell
desc: A large binucleate cell that forms a 'garland' around the anterior end of the proventriculus (cardia) at its junction with the esophagus in both adults and larvae flies. Each cell is surrounded by a basement membrane and there are numerous micro-invaginations (lacunae) extending from the surface into the cytoplasm. At the mouth of each lacuna is a doubled filament forming a specialised filtration system (diaphragm). The filtrate is endocytosed from the lacunae.

term: oenocyte
desc: A large secretory cell found in clusters underlying the epidermis of the abdominal segments of larval abdominal segments.

term: visible light photoreceptor cell
desc: A photoreceptor cell that detects visible light.

term: scotopic photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: photopic photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: obsolete cytotoxic T cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE: A cell responsible for spontaneous cytotoxicity of a variety of tumor cells without prior immunization. These natural killer cells are found in non-immune humans and experimental animals and are thought by some to be the same as killer cells (killing by antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity), but they can also kill in the absence of antibody.']

term: CD4-positive helper T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that cooperates with other lymphocytes via direct contact or cytokine release to initiate a variety of immune functions.

term: obsolete regulatory T cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE: Subpopulation of CD4+ cells which induce CD8+ suppressor T cells to suppress antibody production by B cells. They also stimulate other cellular immune responses.']

term: UV sensitive photoreceptor cell
desc: A photoreceptor cell that detects ultraviolet light.

term: blue sensitive photoreceptor cell
desc: A photoreceptor cell that is sensitive to blue light.

term: green sensitive photoreceptor cell
desc: A photoreceptor cell that is sensitive to green light.

term: red sensitive photoreceptor cell
desc: A photoreceptor cell that is sensitive to red light.

term: inhibitory interneuron
desc: An interneuron (also called relay neuron, association neuron or local circuit neuron) is a multipolar neuron which connects afferent neurons and efferent neurons in neural pathways. Like motor neurons, interneuron cell bodies are always located in the central nervous system (CNS).

term: stromal cell
desc: A connective tissue cell of an organ found in the loose connective tissue. These are most often associated with the uterine mucosa and the ovary as well as the hematopoietic system and elsewhere.

term: follicular epithelial cell
desc: 

term: granulosa cell
desc: A supporting cell for the developing female gamete in the ovary of mammals. They develop from the coelomic epithelial cells of the gonadal ridge. Granulosa cells form a single layer around the mammalian oocyte in the primordial ovarian follicle and advance to form a multilayered cumulus oophorus surrounding the ovum in the Graafian follicle. The major functions of granulosa cells include the production of steroids and LH receptors.

term: type D enteroendocrine cell
desc: A cell found throughout the gastrointestinal tract and in the pancreas. They secrete somatostatin in both an endocrine and paracrine manner. Somatostatin inhibits gastrin, cholecystokinin, insulin, glucagon, pancreatic enzymes, and gastric hydrochloric acid. A variety of substances which inhibit gastric acid secretion (vasoactive intestinal peptide, calcitonin gene-related peptide, cholecystokinin, beta-adrenergic agonists, and gastric inhibitory peptide) are thought to act by releasing somatostatin.

term: theca cell
desc: A flattened stroma cell forming a sheath or theca outside the basal lamina lining the mature ovarian follicle. Thecal interstitial or stromal cells are steroidogenic, and produce primarily androgens which serve as precusors of estrogens in the granulosa cells.

term: enterochromaffin-like cell
desc: A enteroendocrine cell part of the glands of the gastric mucosa. They produce histamine and peptides such as chromogranins. This cell type respond to gastrin by releasing histamine which acts as a paracrine stimulator of the release of hydrochloric acid from the gastric parietal cells.

term: substance P secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes substance P.

term: enkephalin secreting cell
desc: An endorphine cell that secretes enkephalin.

term: endorphin secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes endorphin.

term: type G enteroendocrine cell
desc: An endocrine cell found in the pyloric gland mucosa (antral mucosa) of the stomach of mammals and responsible for the secretion of gastrin and enkephalin. Most abundant in pyloric antrum, pyramidal in form with a narrow apex bearing long microvilli.

term: gastrin secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes gastrin.

term: paneth cell
desc: An epithelial cell found in the basal part of the intestinal glands (crypts of Lieberkuhn) including the appendix. Paneth cells synthesize and secrete lysozyme and cryptdins. Numerous in the deeper parts of the intestinal crypts, particularly in the duodenum, rich in zinc, contain large acidophilic granules, with irregular apical microvilli and prominent membrane-bound vacuoles containing matrix.

term: androgen binding protein secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes androgen binding protein.

term: paracrine cell
desc: A paracrine cell is a secretory cell that secretes an agonist into intercellular spaces in which it diffuses to a target cell other than that which produced it.

term: cardiac muscle myoblast
desc: A precursor cell destined to differentiate into cardiac muscle cell.

term: smooth muscle myoblast
desc: A precursor cell destined to differentiate into smooth muscle myocytes.

term: skeletal muscle myoblast
desc: A myoblast that differentiates into skeletal muscle fibers.

term: perineuronal satellite cell
desc: A non-neuronal cell that surrounds the neuronal cell bodies of the ganglia.

term: macrophage derived foam cell
desc: A type of foam cell derived from a macrophage containing lipids in small vacuoles and typically seen in atherolosclerotic lesions, as well as other conditions.

term: phagocyte (sensu Vertebrata)
desc: A phagocyte in vertebrates that is able to phagocytosis.

term: phagocyte (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: A phagocyte from organisms in the Nematoda or Protostomia clades.

term: prokaryotic cell
desc: 

term: fungal cell
desc: 

term: obsolete spore
desc: OBSOLETE: The reproductive structure of bacteria, fungi and cryptograms.

term: mononuclear cytotrophoblast cell
desc: A cell from the inner layer of the trophoblast of the early mammalian embryo that gives rise to the outer surface and villi of the chorion. Mononuclear crytoblasts fuse to give rise to a multinuclear cytotrophoblast.

term: spheroplast
desc: A cell, usually of bacteria or yeast, which has partially lost its cell wall.

term: syncytiotrophoblast cell
desc: A cell from the outer syncytial layer of the trophoblast of an early mammalian embryo. It It secretes hCG in order to maintain progesterone secretion and sustain a pregnancy.

term: afferent neuron
desc: A neuron which conveys sensory information centrally from the periphery.

term: efferent neuron
desc: A neuron which sends impulses peripherally to activate muscles or secretory cells.

term: nitrergic neuron
desc: A nerve cell where transmission is mediated by nitric oxide.

term: pigmented epithelial cell
desc: 

term: primary neuron
desc: 

term: primary sensory neuron
desc: 

term: CAP motoneuron
desc: 

term: primary motor neuron
desc: 

term: primary interneuron
desc: 

term: secondary neuron
desc: 

term: secondary motor neuron
desc: 

term: obsolete antipodal cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0020093 from Plant Ontology instead. OBSOLETE, use term from plant ontology. A cell located at the chalazal end of the mature embryo sac in angiosperms.

term: obsolete epidermal initial
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000349 from Plant Ontology instead. A relatively unspecialized cell that will give rise to specialized cell types of the epidermis.

term: obsolete idioblast
desc: OBSOLETE: A cell in a tissue that markedly differs in form, size, or contents from other cells in the same tissue.

term: neuron
desc: The basic cellular unit of nervous tissue. Each neuron consists of a body, an axon, and dendrites. Their purpose is to receive, conduct, and transmit impulses in the nervous system.

term: melanoblast
desc: A cell that originates from the neural crest and differentiates into a pigment cell.

term: lymphocyte
desc: A lymphocyte is a leukocyte commonly found in the blood and lymph that has the characteristics of a large nucleus, a neutral staining cytoplasm, and prominent heterochromatin.

term: obsolete sieve tube member
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000289 from Plant Ontology instead. One of the series of cellular components of a sieve tube. It shows a more or less pronounced differentiation between sieve plates (wide pores) and lateral sieve areas (narrow pores). Also sieve tube element and the obsolete sieve tube segment.

term: slowly adapting mechanoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: T-helper 1 cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has the phenotype T-bet-positive, CXCR3-positive, CCR6-negative, and is capable of producing interferon-gamma.

term: T-helper 2 cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has the phenotype GATA-3-positive, CXCR3-negative, CCR6-negative, and is capable of producing interleukin-4.

term: proerythroblast
desc: An immature, nucleated erythrocyte occupying the stage of erythropoeisis that follows formation of erythroid progenitor cells. This cell is CD71-positive, has both a nucleus and a nucleolus, and lacks hematopoeitic lineage markers.

term: animal cell
desc: 

term: basophilic erythroblast
desc: A nucleated immature erythrocyte, having cytoplasm generally similar to that of the earlier proerythroblast but sometimes even more basophilic, and usually regular in outline. The nucleus is still relatively large, but the chromatin strands are thicker and more deeply staining, giving a coarser appearance; the nucleoli have disappeared. This cell is CD71-positive and lacks hematopoeitic lineage markers.

term: polychromatophilic erythroblast
desc: A nucleated, immature erythrocyte in which the nucleus occupies a relatively smaller part of the cell than in its precursor, the basophilic erythroblast. The cytoplasm is beginning to acquire hemoglobin and thus is no longer a purely basophilic, but takes on acidophilic aspects, which becomes progressively more marked as the cell matures. The chromatin of the nucleus is arranged in coarse, deeply staining clumps. This cell is CD71-positive and lacks hematopoeitic lineage markers.

term: unimodal nocireceptor
desc: 

term: orthochromatic erythroblast
desc: The final stage of the nucleated, immature erythrocyte, before nuclear loss. Typically the cytoplasm is described as acidophilic, but it still shows a faint polychromatic tint. The nucleus is small and initially may still have coarse, clumped chromatin, as in its precursor, the polychromatophilic erythroblast, but ultimately it becomes pyknotic, and appears as a deeply staining, blue-black, homogeneous structureless mass. The nucleus is often eccentric and sometimes lobulated.

term: megakaryocyte progenitor cell
desc: The earliest cytologically identifiable precursor in the thrombocytic series. This cell is capable of endomitosis and lacks expression of hematopoieitic lineage markers (lin-negative).

term: gastrin stimulating hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes gastrin stimulating hormone.

term: neuronal brush cell
desc: 

term: megakaryocyte
desc: A giant cell 50 to 100 micron in diameter, with a greatly lobulated nucleus, found in the bone marrow; mature blood platelets are released from its cytoplasm.

term: granulocyte monocyte progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic progenitor cell that is committed to the granulocyte and monocyte lineages. These cells are CD123-positive, and do not express Gata1 or Gata2 but do express C/EBPa, and Pu.1.

term: reticulocyte
desc: An immature erythrocyte that changes the protein composition of its plasma membrane by exosome formation and extrusion. The types of protein removed differ between species though removal of the transferrin receptor is apparent in mammals and birds.

term: promonocyte
desc: A precursor in the monocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between the monoblast and monocyte. This cell is CD11b-positive and has fine azurophil granules.

term: band form neutrophil
desc: A late neutrophilic metamyelocyte in which the nucleus is indented to more than half the distance to the farthest nuclear margin but in no area being condensed to a single filament. The nucleus is in the form of a curved or coiled band, not having acquired the typical multilobar shape of the mature neutrophil. These cells are fMLP receptor-positive, CD11b-positive, CD35-negative, and CD49d-negative.

term: amacrine cell
desc: Interneuron of the vertebrate retina. They integrate, modulate, and interpose a temporal domain in the visual message presented to the retinal ganglion cells, with which they synapse in the inner plexiform layer. They lack large axons.

term: nucleate erythrocyte
desc: An erythrocyte having a nucleus.

term: endospore
desc: A rounded, inactive form that certain bacteria assume under conditions of extreme temperature, dryness, or lack of food. The bacterium develops a waterproof cell wall that protects it from being dried out or damaged.

term: neutrophilic promyelocyte
desc: A promyelocyte committed to the neutrophil lineage. This cell type is GATA-1-positive, C/EBPa-positive, AML-1-positive, MPO-positive, has low expression of PU.1 transcription factor and lacks lactotransferrin expression.

term: fat body cell
desc: A cell found in fat bodies whose primary function is intermediary metabolism.

term: angioblastic mesenchymal cell
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell capable of developing into blood vessel endothelium.

term: polymodal nocireceptor
desc: 

term: amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation cell
desc: A cell that originates in the neural crest, that has certain cytochemical and ultrastructural characteristics and is found scattered throughout the body; types include melanocytes, the cells of the chromaffin system, and cells in the hypothalamus, hypophysis, thyroid, parathyroids, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and pancreas. This cell type concentrates the amino acid precursors of certain amines and decarboxylate them, forming amines that function as regulators and neurotransmitters. This cell type produces substances such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, enkephalin, somatostatin, neurotensin, and substance P, the actions of which may affect contiguous cells, nearby groups of cells, or distant cells, thus functioning as local or systemic hormones. The name is an acronym for amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation cell.

term: cardiac mesenchymal cell
desc: A mesenchymal cell found in the developing heart and that develops into some part of the heart.  These cells derive from intra- and extra-cardiac sources, including the endocardium, epicardium, neural crest, and second heart field.

term: parafollicular cell
desc: A neuroepithelial cells that occurs singly or in small groups, close to the outer follicular borders but within the follicular basement membrane of the thyroid. Expresses a form of the neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) on their surface. Secretes calcitonin, 5-hydroxytryptamine and dopamine.

term: leucophore
desc: A pigment cell derived from the neural crest. Contains uric acid or other purine crystals deposited in stacks called leucosomes. The crystals reflect light and this gives a white appearance under white light.

term: retinal cone cell
desc: One of the two photoreceptor cell types in the vertebrate retina. In cones the photopigment is in invaginations of the cell membrane of the outer segment. Cones are less sensitive to light than rods, but they provide vision with higher spatial and temporal acuity, and the combination of signals from cones with different pigments allows color vision.

term: erythrophore
desc: A pigment cell derived from the neural crest. Contains pteridine and/or carotenoid pigments in structures called pterinosomes or erythrosomes. This gives an orange to red appearance.

term: corneal epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the cornea.

term: monocyte
desc: Myeloid mononuclear recirculating leukocyte that can act as a precursor of tissue macrophages, osteoclasts and some populations of tissue dendritic cells.

term: type EC enteroendocrine cell
desc: A subtype of enteroendocrine cells found in the gastrointestinal mucosa, particularly in the glands of pyloric antrum; duodenum; and ileum. These cell type secretes serotonin and some neurotransmitters including enkephalins and substance P. Their secretory granules stain readily with silver (argentaffin stain).

term: experimentally modified cell in vitro
desc: A cell in vitro that has undergone physical changes as a consequence of a deliberate and specific experimental procedure.

term: border follicle cell
desc: 

term: neutrophilic myelocyte
desc: A neutrophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a promyelocyte and a metamyelocyte; in this stage, production of primary granules is complete and neutrophil-specific granules has started. No nucleolus is present. This cell type is CD13-positive, CD16-negative, integrin alpha-M-positive, CD15-positive, CD33-positive, CD24-positive, C/EBP-a-positive, C/EBPe-positive, PU.1-positive, lactotransferrin-positive, myeloperoxidase-positive and NGAL-positive.

term: peritoneal macrophage
desc: A macrophage resident in the peritoneum under non-inflammatory conditions. Markers include F4/80-high, CD11b-high, CD68-positive, SIGNR1-positive, CD115-high, MHC-II-negative, and Dectin-1-positive.

term: neutrophilic metamyelocyte
desc: A neutrophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a myelocyte and the band form neutrophil. The protein synthesis seen in earlier stages decreases or stops; the nucleus becomes indented where the indentation is smaller than half the distance to the farthest nuclear margin; chromatin becomes coarse and clumped; specific granules predominate while primary granules are rare; and the cytoplasm becomes amphophilic like that of a mature granulocyte. This cell type is integrin alpha-M-positive, CD13-negative, CD15-positive, CD16-positive, CD33-positive, CD24-positive, fMLP receptor-negative and has expression of C/EBP-a, C/EBP-e, PU.1 transcription factor, lactotransferrin, myeloperoxidase and neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin.

term: alveolar macrophage
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage found in the alveoli of the lungs. Ingests small inhaled particles resulting in degradation and presentation of the antigen to immunocompetent cells. Markers include F4/80-positive, CD11b-/low, CD11c-positive, CD68-positive, sialoadhesin-positive, dectin-1-positive, MR-positive, CX3CR1-negative.

term: enterocyte
desc: An epithelial cell that has its apical plasma membrane folded into microvilli to provide ample surface for the absorption of nutrients from the intestinal lumen.

term: obsolete null cell
desc: ['OBSOLETE: A class of lymphocytes characterized by the lack of surface markers specific for either T or B cells.']

term: germ cell
desc: The reproductive cell in multicellular organisms.

term: cold sensing thermoreceptor cell
desc: A thermoreceptor cell that detects reduced temperatures.

term: odontoclast
desc: A specialized osteoclast associated with the absorption and removal of cementum.

term: cochlear inner hair cell
desc: A bulbous cell that is medially placed in one row in the organ of Corti. In contrast to the outer hair cells, the inner hair cells are fewer in number, have fewer sensory hairs, and are less differentiated.

term: small luteal cell
desc: A progesterone secreting cell in the corpus luteum that develops from theca cells.

term: warmth sensing thermoreceptor cell
desc: A thermoreceptor cell that detects reduced temperatures.

term: large luteal cell
desc: A large, progesterone secreting cell in the corpus luteum that develops from the granulosa cells.

term: androgen secreting cell
desc: A steroid hormone secreting cell that secretes androgen.

term: skeletal muscle satellite cell
desc: An elongated, spindle-shaped, cell that is located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of a muscle fiber. These cells are mostly quiescent, but upon activation they divide to produce cells that generate new muscle fibers.

term: enucleate erythrocyte
desc: An erythrocyte lacking a nucleus.

term: sexual spore
desc: A spore formed following meiosis. Sometimes following meiosis, prospores may undergo one or more rounds of mitosis before they are fully mature.

term: microconidium
desc: The smaller of two types of asexual spores formed by some fungi. An ovoid to pear-shaped asexual spore that contains very little cytoplasm and organelles, is uninucleate, and forms in vegetative hypae within a mycelium. Micronidia are extruded from the hyphal cell wall.

term: pyramidal neuron
desc: Pyramidal neurons have a pyramid-shaped soma with the apex and an apical dendrite pointed toward the pial surface and other dendrites and an axon emerging from the base. The axons may have local collaterals but also project outside their  region. Pyramidal neurons are found in the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus, and the amygdala.

term: conidium
desc: An asexual, nonmotile spore formed by higher fungi; conidia are usually made from the side or tip of specialized sporogenous cells and do not form by progressive cleavage of the cytoplasm.

term: heterokaryon
desc: A fungal cell with two or more genetically distinct nuclei.

term: outer hair cell
desc: A mechanoreceptor in the organ of Corti. In mammals the outer hair cells are arranged in three rows which are further from the modiolus than the single row of inner hair cells. The motile properties of the outer hair cells may contribute actively to tuning the sensitivity and frequency selectivity of the cochlea.

term: pressoreceptor cell
desc: A receptor in the vascular system, particularly the aorta and carotid sinus, which is sensitive to stretch of the vessel walls.

term: dikaryon
desc: A fungal cell with two genetically distinct haploid nuclei.

term: retinal rod cell
desc: One of the two photoreceptor cell types of the vertebrate retina. In rods the photopigment is in stacks of membranous disks separate from the outer cell membrane. Rods are more sensitive to light than cones, but rod mediated vision has less spatial and temporal resolution than cone vision.

term: fungal asexual spore
desc: A spore formed following mitosis or mitoses.

term: macroconidium
desc: The larger of two types of asexual spores formed by some fungi; usually round or oblong.

term: ascospore
desc: A thick walled spore that stores and protects one or more nuclei following sexual reproduction in an Ascomycete.

term: zygospore
desc: A thick walled, sexual, resting spore formed by Zygomycetes; sometimes refers to the spore and the multi-layered cell wall that encloses the spore, the zygosporangium.

term: vestibular hair cell
desc: A mechanoreceptor located in the acoustic maculae and the semicircular canals that mediates the sense of balance, movement, and head position. The vestibular hair cells are connected to accessory structures in such a way that movements of the head displace their stereocilia. This influences the membrane potential of the cells which relay information about movements via the vestibular part of the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain stem.

term: obsolete plant cell
desc: 

term: eosinophil progenitor cell
desc: 

term: eosinophilic myelocyte
desc: A eosinophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a promyelocyte and a metamyelocyte;in this stage, production of primary granules is complete and eosinophil-specific granules has started. No nucleolus is present. These cells are integrin alpha-M-positive, CD13-positive, CD15-positive, CD16-negative, CD24-positive, and CD33-positive.

term: basophil progenitor cell
desc: A progenitor cell committed to the basophil lineage. This cell lacks hematopoietic lineage markers (lin-negative) and is CD34-positive, T1/ST2-low, CD117-negative, and FceRIa-high. This cell also expresses Gata-1, Gata-2 and C/EBPa.

term: basophilic myelocyte
desc: A basophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a promyelocyte and a metamyelocyte; in this stage, production of primary granules is complete and basophil-specific granules has started. No nucleolus is present. Markers are being integrin alpha-M-positive, fucosyltransferase FUT4-positive, CD33-positive, CD24-positive, aminopeptidase N-positive.

term: basidiospore
desc: A thick walled spore containing one or more haploid nuclei produced by sexual reproduction in an Basidiomycete; formed externally on extrusions of the basidium.

term: obsolete sporangiospore
desc: OBSOLETE: A walled spore produced in a sporangium.

term: GABAergic neuron
desc: A neuron that uses GABA as a vesicular neurotransmitter

term: sheath cell
desc: 

term: support cell (sensu Nematoda)
desc: 

term: obsolete zoospore
desc: OBSOLETE: A sporangiospore that is motile, having flagella.

term: fusion competent myoblast
desc: A myoblast that is committed to a myotube-specific program of differentiation but not yet fused. It undergoes very limited additional proliferation. After fusion, it will take on a muscle identity specified by a `muscle founder cell` (CL:0008006).

term: acinar cell
desc: A secretory cell that is grouped together with other cells of the same type to form grape shaped clusters known as acini (singular acinus).

term: natural killer cell
desc: A lymphocyte that can spontaneously kill a variety of target cells without prior antigenic activation via germline encoded activation receptors and also regulate immune responses via cytokine release and direct contact with other cells.

term: CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A mature alpha-beta T cell that expresses an alpha-beta T cell receptor and the CD4 coreceptor.

term: CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A T cell expressing an alpha-beta T cell receptor and the CD8 coreceptor.

term: olfactory granule cell
desc: Granule cell that is part of the olfactory bulb.

term: transporting cell
desc: A cell involved in transporting nutrients, minerals, water, gases and other chemicals between cells for a variety of purposes including conveying nutrition to other tissues, removing waste products from the tissues, conveying gases for respiration, distributing heat and repelling invasion of foreign substances.

term: photosynthetic cell
desc: A cell that can perform photosynthesis, in which carbohydrates are synthesized from carbon dioxide and water, using light as the energy source.

term: storage cell
desc: A cell that is specialized to store a particular substance(s), which is(are) later released from the store for a particular purpose.

term: supportive cell
desc: A cell whose primary function is to support other cell types.

term: labyrinth supporting cell
desc: Cells forming a framework supporting the organ of Corti. Specific cells are those of Claudius, Deiters and Hensen.

term: hepatic stellate cell
desc: A cell that is found in the perisinusoidal space of the liver that is capable of multiple roles including storage of retinol, presentation of antigen to T cells (including CD1d-restricted NKT cells), and upon activation, production of extracellular matrix components that can contribute to liver fibrosis. This activated state has a myofibroblast-like phenotype, though it's not clear in the literature if this is terminally differentiated. This cell type comprises approximately 8-15% of total cells in the liver.

term: Hensen cell
desc: A tall supporting cell that is arranged in rows adjacent to the last row of outer phalangeal cells. This cell type constitutes the outer border of the organ of Corti.

term: Claudius cell
desc: A cuboidal cell which along with Boettcher's cells form the floor of the external spiral sulcus, external to the organ of Corti.

term: Deiter's cell
desc: The outer phalangeal cells of the organ of Corti. This cell holds the base of the hair cell in a cup-shaped depression.

term: Mueller cell
desc: 

term: chromophil cell of anterior pituitary gland
desc: A cell that stains readily in the anterior pituitary gland.

term: acidophil cell of pars distalis of adenohypophysis
desc: An acidophilic chromophil cell that of the anterior pituitary gland.

term: basophil cell of pars distalis of adenohypophysis
desc: A basophillic chromophil cell that of the anterior pituitary gland.

term: chromophobe cell
desc: A cell that is resistant to stains.

term: folliculostellate cell
desc: A supportive cell of the vertebrate pituitary that provides macromolecular transport and secretes hormones.

term: Bergmann glial cell
desc: Type of radial astrocyte in the cerebellar cortex that have their cell bodies in the Purkinje cell layer and processes that extend into the molecular layer, terminating with bulbous endfeet at the pial surface. Bergmann glia express high densities of glutamate transporters that limit diffusion of the neurotransmitter glutamate during its release from synaptic terminals. Besides their role in early development of the cerebellum, Bergmann glia are also required for the pruning or addition of synapses.

term: pituicyte
desc: A cell with long processes running parallel to adjacent axons in the proximal infundibulum of the neurohypophysis. These processes form a three-dimensional network among the axons of the hypothalamic neurosecretory cells and are connected by gap junctions which provide for their metabolic coupling. This cell type constitutes most of the nonexcitable tissue in the neurohypophsis; function may include possibly acting as an intermediate in the modulation of oxytocin and vasopressin release. This cell type is highly variable in size and shape and commonly contain lipid droplets and deposits of lipochrome pigment.

term: basal cell
desc: Undifferentiated; mitotic stem cell for other epithelial cell types; rounded or elliptical with little cytoplasm and few organelles; contain cytokeratin intermediate filament.

term: multinucleated giant cell
desc: A phagocytic cell formed by the fusion of macrophages, occurs in chronic inflammatory responses to persistent microorganism such as M.tuberculosis, component of granulomas. Sometimes used to refer to megakaryocytes.

term: kidney granular cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell that synthesizes, stores, and secretes the enzyme renin. This cell type are located in the wall of the afferent arteriole at the entrance to the glomerulus. While having a different origin than other kidney smooth muscle cells, this cell type expresses smooth muscle actin upon maturation.

term: prickle cell
desc: A cell with delicate radiating processes known as desmosomes that form intercellular bridges between other cells of this type. This cell type forms the stratum spinosum (prickle cell layer). A function of this cell is to generate keratin.

term: mesangial cell
desc: A cell type that encapsulates the capillaries and venules in the kidney. This cell secretes mesangial matrix that provides the structural support for the capillaries.

term: mucous neck cell
desc: A mucus-secreting cell, with numerous apical secretory vesicles containing mucins; nucleus are basally displaced; numerous at the neck of mucus secreting glands

term: pinealocyte
desc: This cell type produces and secretes melatonin and forms the pineal parenchyma. Extending from each cell body, which has a spherical, oval or lobulated mucleus, are one or more tortuous basophilic processes, containing parallel microtubules known as synaptic ribbons. These processes end in expanded terminal buds near capillaries or less, frequently, ependymal cells of the pineal recess. The terminal buds contain granular endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria and electron-dense cored vesicles, which store monoamines and polypeptide hormones, release of which appears to require sympathetic innervation.

term: glomerular visceral epithelial cell
desc: A glomerular visceral epithelial cell is a specialized kidney epithelial cell that contains "feet" that interdigitate with the "feet" of other glomerular epithelial cells.

term: primary oocyte
desc: A primary oocyte is an oocyte that has not completed female meosis I.

term: secondary oocyte
desc: A secondary oocyte is an oocyte that has not completed meiosis II.

term: primary spermatocyte
desc: A diploid cell that has derived from a spermatogonium and can subsequently begin meiosis and divide into two haploid secondary spermatocytes.

term: secondary spermatocyte
desc: One of the two haploid cells into which a primary spermatocyte divides, and which in turn gives origin to spermatids.

term: cuticle secreting cell
desc: An epithelial cell that secretes cuticle.

term: eggshell secreting cell
desc: An extracellular matrix secreting cell that secretes eggshell.

term: glycocalyx secreting cell
desc: An extracellular matrix secreting cell that secretes glycocalyx.

term: distal tip cell (sensu Nematoda)
desc: 

term: neuroglioblast (sensu Nematoda)
desc: 

term: valve cell
desc: 

term: closable valve cell
desc: 

term: permanently open valve cell
desc: 

term: fenestrated cell
desc: 

term: collagen secreting cell
desc: An extracellular matrix secreting cell that secretes collagen.

term: obsolete parenchymal cell
desc: OBSOLETE: The cell characteristic of an organ, as distinguished from associated connective or supporting tissues.

term: pericyte cell
desc: An elongated, contractile cell found wrapped about precapillary arterioles outside the basement membrane. Pericytes are present in capillaries where proper adventitia and muscle layer are missing (thus distingushing this cell type from adventitial cells). They are relatively undifferentiated and may become fibroblasts, macrophages, or smooth muscle cells.

term: primordial germ cell
desc: A primordial germ cell is a diploid germ cell precursors that transiently exist in the embryo before they enter into close association with the somatic cells of the gonad and become irreversibly committed as germ cells.

term: centripetally migrating follicle cell
desc: 

term: obsolete tracheary element
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0000290 from Plant Ontology instead. A water conducting cell, tracheid or vessel member.

term: Kenyon cell
desc: 

term: interfollicle cell
desc: 

term: female gamete
desc: A mature sexual reproductive cell of the female germline.

term: cap cell
desc: 

term: gut absorptive cell
desc: Cell of the intestinal epithelium with a brush border made up of many parallel packed microvilli; associated with absorption, particularly of macromolecules.

term: commissural neuron
desc: 

term: glutamatergic neuron
desc: 

term: muscle precursor cell
desc: A non-terminally differentiated cell that is capable of developing into a muscle cell.

term: radial glial cell
desc: A cell present in the developing CNS. Functions as both a precursor cell and as a scaffold to support neuronal migration.

term: M cell of gut
desc: An absorptive cell of the gut epithelium that endocytoses microorganisms and intact macromolecules from the gut lumen and transports them to the subepithelial space where they are presented to antigen-presenting cells and lymphocytes.

term: ependymoglial cell
desc: A cell that transports hormones from neurosecretory cells. This nerve cell is characterized by bipolar shape and endfeet that contact a basal lamina around blood vessels, and/or the pia mater or vitreous body of the eye and additionally contact the ventricular surface or sub-retinal space.

term: littoral cell of liver
desc: 

term: obsolete meristematic cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0004010 from Plant Ontology instead. A cell synthesizing protoplasm and producing new cells by division and with only a primary cell wall.

term: cerebrospinal fluid secreting cell
desc: A columnar/cuboidal epithelial cell that secretes cerebrospinal fluid.

term: R1 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: perijunctional fibroblast
desc: A fibroblast-like cell that provides support at neuromuscular junctions in vertebrates and are localized outside the synaptic basal lamina.

term: myoendocrine cell
desc: A cell with both myofibrils and secretory granules.

term: R2 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: stellate interneuron
desc: 

term: terminal Schwann cell
desc: A neuroglial cell of the peripheral nervous system inside the basal lamina of the neuromuscular junction providing chemical and physical support to the synapse.

term: neuroglioform cell
desc: A stellate interneuron having 7-10 dendrites that may branch.

term: R3 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: Cajal-Retzius cell
desc: One of a transient population of pioneering neurons in the cerebral cortex. These cells are slender bipolar cells of the developing marginal zone. One feature of these cells in mammals is that they express the Reelin gene.

term: PP cell
desc: A cell that stores and secretes pancreatic polypeptide hormone.

term: R4 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: obsolete paraganglial cell
desc: 

term: paraganglial type 1 cell
desc: A type of glomus or chief cell, is sensitive to hypoxia and produce catecholamines.

term: dopaminergic neuron
desc: A neuron that releases dopamine as a neurotransmitter.

term: paraganglia type 2 cell
desc: Supports paraganglial type 1 cell.

term: R5 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: sustentacular cell
desc: Cell that provides some or all mechanical, nutritional and phagocytic support to their neighbors.

term: endothelial tip cell
desc: A specialized endothelial cell that senses extracellular signals and guides the directed growth of blood vessels.

term: R6 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: choroid plexus epithelial cell
desc: Specialized ependymal cell that produces the cerebrospinal fluid from the blood and secretes it into the lumen of the brain and spinal chord.

term: R7 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: leptomeningeal cell
desc: Stromal cell that forms the internal covering of the vertebrate brain and produces ECM for this and the choroid plexus.

term: R8 photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: neurecto-epithelial cell
desc: Epithelial cells derived from neural plate and neural crest.

term: cumulus cell
desc: Cumulus cell is a specialized granulosa cell that surrounds and nourishes the oocyte. This cell-type surrounds the fully-grown oocyte to form a cumulus-oocyte complex (abbr. COC). The terms cumulus oophorus cells, cumulus granulosa cells, cumulus oophorous granulosa cells, granulosa-cumulus cells are used to make a distinction between this cell and the other functionally different subpopulation of granulosa cells at the wall of the Graafian follicle.

term: stratum granulosum cell
desc: 

term: corona radiata cell
desc: 

term: embryonic crystal cell
desc: 

term: lymph gland crystal cell
desc: 

term: fusimotor neuron
desc: A subset of motor neurons that innervates intrafusal muscle fibers and has small diameter axons.

term: compound eye cone cell
desc: 

term: posterior cone cell (sensu Endopterygota)
desc: 

term: anterior cone cell (sensu Endopterygota)
desc: 

term: equatorial cone cell (sensu Endopterygota)
desc: 

term: cystoblast
desc: 

term: somatic stem cell
desc: A stem cell that can give rise to cell types of the body other than those of the germ-line.

term: heterocyst
desc: A differentiated cell that functions as a site of nitrogen fixation under aerobic conditions.

term: nitrogen fixing cell
desc: 

term: chlamydospore
desc: An asexual 1-celled spore (primarily for perennation, not dissemination). Originates endogenously and singly within part of a pre-existing cell by the contraction of the protoplast. Possesses an inner secondary and often thickened hyaline or brown wall, usually impregnated with hydrophobic material.

term: primary pigment cell
desc: 

term: secondary pigment cell
desc: 

term: tertiary pigment cell
desc: 

term: leading edge cell
desc: A cell at the front of a migrating epithelial sheet.

term: urothelial cell
desc: A cell of a layer of transitional epithelium in the wall of the bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis, external to the lamina propria.

term: amoeboid cell
desc: 

term: lymph gland plasmatocyte
desc: 

term: embryonic gland plasmatocyte
desc: 

term: lymph gland hemocyte
desc: 

term: embryonic gland hemocyte
desc: 

term: striated muscle cell
desc: Muscle cell which has as its direct parts myofilaments organized into sarcomeres.

term: leukocyte
desc: An achromatic cell of the myeloid or lymphoid lineages capable of ameboid movement, found in blood or other tissue.

term: retinal ganglion cell
desc: The set of neurons that receives neural inputs via bipolar, horizontal and amacrine cells. The axons of these cells make up the optic nerve.

term: spinal accessory motor neuron
desc: A motor neuron that is located in the cervical region of the spinal cord and selectively innervates the sternocleidmastoid or trapezius muscle. Unlike other motor neurons, they extend axons dorsally along lateral margins of the spinal cord.

term: periarticular chondrocyte
desc: A round chondrocyte that first differentiates in the late embryonic growth plate of bone.

term: hypertrophic chondrocyte
desc: Chondrocyte that is terminally differentiated, produces type X collagen, is large in size, and often associated with the replacement of cartilage by bone (endochondral ossification).

term: columnar chondrocyte
desc: A columnar chondrocyte that differentiates in the late embryonic growth plate of bone. Columnar chondrocytes vigorously proliferate and form columns in the growth plate.

term: retina horizontal cell
desc: A neuron that laterally connects other neurons in the inner nuclear layer of the retina.

term: cardiac muscle cell
desc: Cardiac muscle cells are striated muscle cells that are responsible for heart contraction. In mammals, the contractile fiber resembles those of skeletal muscle but are only one third as large in diameter, are richer in sarcoplasm, and contain centrally located instead of peripheral nuclei.

term: cyanophore
desc: A pigment cell derived from the neural crest. Contains blue pigment of unknown chemical composition in fibrous organelles termed cyanosomes. This gives a blue appearance.

term: retinal bipolar neuron
desc: A bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner plexiform layer.

term: ON-bipolar cell
desc: A bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer. These cells depolarize in response to light stimulation of their corresponding photoreceptors.

term: OFF-bipolar cell
desc: A bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with photoreceptors cells and neurons in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer. These cells hyperpolarize in response to light stimulation of their corresponding photoreceptors.

term: rod bipolar cell
desc: A bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with rod photoreceptor cells and neurons in the inner plexiform layer.

term: cone retinal bipolar cell
desc: A bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptor cells and neurons in the inner plexiform layer.

term: type 1 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An OFF-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer. The cell body of these cells is in the middle of the inner plexiform layer. The dendritic tree is stout and the axon terminates in sublamina 1. The axonal terminal is wide and has only a few varicosities.

term: type 2 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An OFF-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer. The dendritic tree is not well filled and the dendrites are more delicate than in type 1 cells. The axon terminal is bushier and exhibits a dense plexus of varicosities in the inner part of sublamina 1.

term: type 3 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An OFF-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer. The dendritic tree is delicate and the dendritic tips appear small when compared with type 1 cells. The axon terminal is stratified and restricted to sublamina 2 of the inner plexiform layer.

term: type 4 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An OFF-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer. The cell has a diffuse axon terminal with varicosities in sublaminae 1 and 2 of the inner plexiform layer.

term: type 5 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An ON-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer. The axon terminal is restricted to sublamina 3 of the inner plexiform layer. It is narrowly stratified and branched. The dendritic tree has many delicate branches.

term: type 6 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An ON-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer. The cell has a loose, delicate axon terminal that opens in sublamina 3 of the inner plexiform layer and descends into sublamina 4.

term: type 7 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An ON-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer. The axon terminal is narrowly stratified and are found just below a calretinin-expressing band in sublamina 4 of the inner plexiform layer.

term: type 8 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An ON-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer. This cell has the widest dendritic field and the widest axon terminal of all retinal bipolar cells. The axon terminal is delicate and stratified through sublaminae 4 and 5 of the inner plexiform layer.

term: type 9 cone bipolar cell (sensu Mus)
desc: An ON-bipolar neuron found in the retina and having connections with cone photoreceptors cells and neurons in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer. The dendritic tree is wide and the dendritic convergence indicates cone selectivity. The axon terminal is sparsely branched and terminates in sublamina 5 of the inner plexiform layer.

term: nucleated thrombocyte
desc: A nucleated blood cell involved in coagulation, typically seen in birds and other non-mammalian vertebrates.

term: myeloid cell
desc: A cell of the monocyte, granulocyte, mast cell, megakaryocyte, or erythroid lineage.

term: erythroid lineage cell
desc: A immature or mature cell in the lineage leading to and including erythrocytes.

term: erythroblast
desc: A nucleated precursor of an erythrocyte that lacks hematopoietic lineage markers.

term: myeloid leukocyte
desc: A cell of the monocyte, granulocyte, or mast cell lineage.

term: basophil
desc: Any of the immature or mature forms of a granular leukocyte that in its mature form has an irregularly shaped, pale-staining nucleus that is partially constricted into two lobes, and with cytoplasm that contains coarse, bluish-black granules of variable size. Basophils contain vasoactive amines such as histamine and serotonin, which are released on appropriate stimulation. A basophil is CD123-positive, CD193-positive, CD203c-positive, and FceRIa-positive.

term: immature basophil
desc: Any of the immature forms of a basophil, in which basophilic specific granules are present but other phenotypic features of the mature form may be lacking.

term: basophilic metamyelocyte
desc: A basophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a basophilic myelocyte and a band form basophil. The nucleus becomes indented where the indentation is smaller than half the distance to the farthest nuclear margin; chromatin becomes coarse and clumped; specific granules predominate while primary granules are rare. Markers are CD11b-positive, CD15-positive, CD16-positive, CD24-positive, CD33-positive, and CD13-positive.

term: band form basophil
desc: A late basophilic metamyelocyte in which the nucleus is in the form of a curved or coiled band, not having acquired the typical multilobar shape of the mature basophil.

term: eosinophil
desc: Any of the immature or mature forms of a granular leukocyte with a nucleus that usually has two lobes connected by one or more slender threads of chromatin, and cytoplasm containing coarse, round granules that are uniform in size and which can be stained by the dye eosin. Eosinophils are CD9-positive, CD191-positive, and CD193-positive.

term: immature eosinophil
desc: Any of the immature forms of an eosinophil, in which eosinophilic specific granules are present but other phenotypic features of the mature form may be lacking.

term: eosinophilic metamyelocyte
desc: A eosinophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a eosinophilic myelocyte and a band form eosinophil. The nucleus becomes indented where the indentation is smaller than half the distance to the farthest nuclear margin; chromatin becomes coarse and clumped; specific granules predominate while primary granules are rare. Markers are integrin alpha-M-positive, fucosyltransferase FUT4-positive, low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor III-positive, CD33-positive, CD24-positive and aminopeptidase N-negative.

term: band form eosinophil
desc: A late eosinophilic metamyelocyte in which the nucleus is in the form of a curved or coiled band, not having acquired the typical multilobar shape of the mature basophil.

term: neutrophil
desc: Any of the immature or mature forms of a granular leukocyte that in its mature form has a nucleus with three to five lobes connected by slender threads of chromatin, and cytoplasm containing fine inconspicuous granules and stainable by neutral dyes.

term: immature neutrophil
desc: Any of the immature forms of a neutrophil in which neutrophilic specific granules are present but other phenotypic features of the mature form may be lacking.

term: mesangial phagocyte
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage of the renal glomerular mesangium involved in the disposal and degradation of filtration residues, presentation of antigen to T cells and in tissue remodeling.

term: mononuclear osteoclast
desc: A specialized mononuclear osteoclast associated with the absorption and removal of bone, precursor of multinuclear osteoclasts.

term: multinuclear osteoclast
desc: A specialized multinuclear osteoclast associated with the absorption and removal of bone.

term: multinuclear odontoclast
desc: A specialized multinuclear osteoclast associated with the absorption and removal of cementum.

term: mononuclear odontoclast
desc: A specialized mononuclear osteoclast associated with the absorption and removal of cementum.

term: myeloid dendritic cell
desc: A dendritic cell of the myeloid lineage.

term: multinucleated phagocyte
desc: A phagocyte formed by the fusion of mononuclear phagocytes.

term: plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: A dendritic cell type of distinct morphology, localization, and surface marker expression (CD123-positive) from other dendritic cell types and associated with early stage immune responses, particularly the release of physiologically abundant amounts of type I interferons in response to infection.

term: mature B cell
desc: A B cell that is mature, having left the bone marrow. Initially, these cells are IgM-positive and IgD-positive, and they can be activated by antigen.

term: plasma cell
desc: A terminally differentiated, post-mitotic, antibody secreting cell of the B cell lineage with the phenotype CD138-positive, surface immunonoglobulin-negative, and MHC Class II-negative. Plasma cells are oval or round with extensive rough endoplasmic reticulum, a well-developed Golgi apparatus, and a round nucleus having a characteristic cartwheel heterochromatin pattern and are devoted to producing large amounts of immunoglobulin.

term: memory B cell
desc: A memory B cell is a mature B cell that is long-lived, readily activated upon re-encounter of its antigenic determinant, and has been selected for expression of higher affinity immunoglobulin. This cell type has the phenotype CD19-positive, CD20-positive, MHC Class II-positive, and CD138-negative.

term: naive B cell
desc: A naive B cell is a mature B cell that has the phenotype surface IgD-positive, surface IgM-positive, CD20-positive, CD27-negative and that has not yet been activated by antigen in the periphery.

term: alpha-beta T cell
desc: A T cell that expresses an alpha-beta T cell receptor complex.

term: immature alpha-beta T cell
desc: An alpha-beta T cell that has an immature phenotype and has not completed T cell selection.

term: mature alpha-beta T cell
desc: A alpha-beta T cell that has a mature phenotype.

term: CD4-positive, CD25-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, CD25-positive, alpha-beta T cell that regulates overall immune responses as well as the responses of other T cell subsets through direct cell-cell contact and cytokine release.

term: CD4-positive, alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that is found in the columnar epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract.

term: CD8-positive, alpha-beta cytotoxic T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell that is capable of killing target cells in an antigen specific manner with the phenotype perforin-positive and granzyme B-positive.

term: CD8-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell that regulates overall immune responses as well as the responses of other T cell subsets through direct cell-cell contact and cytokine release.

term: CD8-alpha-beta-positive, alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell found in the columnar epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract. Intraepithelial T cells often have distinct developmental pathways and activation requirements.

term: alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A mature alpha-beta T cell of the columnar epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract. Intraepithelial T cells often have distinct developmental pathways and activation requirements.

term: gamma-delta T cell
desc: A T cell that expresses a gamma-delta T cell receptor complex.

term: immature gamma-delta T cell
desc: A gamma-delta T cell that has an immature phenotype.

term: mature gamma-delta T cell
desc: A gamma-delta T cell that has a mature phenotype. These cells can be found in tissues and circulation where they express unique TCR repertoire depending on their location.

term: gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A mature gamma-delta T cell that is found in the columnar epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract. These cells participate in mucosal immune responses.

term: CD8-alpha alpha positive, gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell that has the phenotype CD8-alpha alpha-positive.

term: CD4-negative CD8-negative gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell that has the phenotype CD4-negative and CD8-negative.

term: immature single positive thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has the phenotype CD4-negative, CD8-positive, CD44-negative, CD25-negative, and pre-TCR-positive.

term: DN2 thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has the phenotype CD4-negative, CD8-negative, CD44-positive, and CD25-positive.

term: DN3 thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has the phenotype CD4-negative, CD8-negative, CD44-negative, and CD25-positive and expressing the T cell receptor beta-chain in complex with the pre-T cell receptor alpha chain.

term: DN4 thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has the phenotype CD4-negative, CD8-negative, CD44-negative, CD25-negative, and pre-TCR-positive.

term: double-positive, alpha-beta thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte expressing the alpha-beta T cell receptor complex as well as both the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors.

term: CD4-positive, alpha-beta thymocyte
desc: An immature alpha-beta T cell that is located in the thymus and is CD4-positive and CD8-negative.

term: CD8-positive, alpha-beta thymocyte
desc: An immature alpha-beta T cell that is located in the thymus and is CD8-positive and CD4-negative.

term: memory T cell
desc: A distinctly differentiated long-lived T cell that has the phenotype CD45RO-positive and CD127-positive.

term: mature NK T cell
desc: A mature alpha-beta T cell of a distinct lineage that bears natural killer markers and a T cell receptor specific for a limited set of ligands. NK T cells have activation and regulatory roles particularly early in an immune response.

term: regulatory T cell
desc: A T cell which regulates overall immune responses as well as the responses of other T cell subsets through direct cell-cell contact and cytokine release.

term: immature B cell
desc: An immature B cell is a B cell that has the phenotype surface IgM-positive and surface IgD-negative, and have not undergone class immunoglobulin class switching or peripheral encounter with antigen and activation.

term: precursor B cell
desc: A precursor B cell is a B cell with the phenotype CD10-positive.

term: transitional stage B cell
desc: An immature B cell of an intermediate stage between the pre-B cell stage and the mature naive stage with the phenotype surface IgM-positive and CD19-positive, and are subject to the process of B cell selection. A transitional B cell migrates from the bone marrow into the peripheral circulation, and then to the spleen.

term: B-1 B cell
desc: A B cell of distinct lineage and surface marker expression. B-1 B cells are thought to be the primary source of natural IgM immunoglobulin, that is, IgM produced in large quantities without prior antigenic stimulation and generally reactive against various microorganisms, as well as the source of T-independent IgA immunoglobulin in the mucosal areas. These cells are CD43-positive.

term: B-1a B cell
desc: A B-1 B cell that has the phenotype CD5-positive.

term: B-1b B cell
desc: A B-1 B cell that has the phenotype CD5-negative, but having other phenotypic attributes of a B-1 B cell.

term: B-2 B cell
desc: A conventional B cell subject to antigenic stimulation and dependent on T cell help and with a distinct surface marker expression pattern from B-1 B cells. These cells are CD43-negative.

term: immature natural killer cell
desc: A natural killer cell that is developmentally immature and expresses natural killer cell receptors (NKR).

term: mature natural killer cell
desc: A natural killer cell that is developmentally mature and expresses a variety of inhibitory and activating receptors that recognize MHC class I and other stress related molecules.

term: pro-NK cell
desc: A lymphoid progenitor cell that is committed to the natural killer cell lineage, expressing CD122 (IL-15) receptor, but lacking many of the phenotypic characteristics of later stages of natural killer cell development such as expression of NK activating and inhibitory molecules. In human this cell has the phenotype CD34-positive, CD45RA-positive, CD10-positive, CD117-negative, and CD161 negative.

term: pro-B cell
desc: A progenitor cell of the B cell lineage, with some lineage specific activity such as early stages of recombination of B cell receptor genes, but not yet fully committed to the B cell lineage until the expression of PAX5 occurs.

term: pro-T cell
desc: A lymphoid progenitor cell of the T cell lineage, with some lineage specific marker expression, but not yet fully committed to the T cell lineage.

term: thromboblast
desc: A progenitor cell of the thrombocyte, a nucleated blood cell involved in coagulation typically seen in birds and other non-mammalian vertebrates.

term: basophilic myeloblast
desc: A myeloblast committed to the basophil lineage.

term: basophilic promyelocyte
desc: A promyelocyte committed to the basophil lineage.

term: mast cell progenitor
desc: A progenitor cell of the mast cell lineage. Markers for this cell are FceRIa-low, CD117-positive, CD9-positive, T1/ST2-positive, SCA1-negative, and lineage-negative.

term: eosinophilic myeloblast
desc: A myeloblast committed to the eosinophil lineage.

term: eosinophilic promyelocyte
desc: A promyelocyte committed to the eosinophil lineage.

term: neutrophil progenitor cell
desc: A progenitor cell of the neutrophil lineage.

term: myeloblast
desc: The most primitive precursor in the granulocytic series, having fine, evenly distributed chromatin, several nucleoli, a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ration (5:1-7:1), and a nongranular basophilic cytoplasm. They reside in the bone marrow.

term: promyelocyte
desc: A precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a myeloblast and myelocyte, that has distinct nucleoli, a nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio of 5:1 to 3:1, and containing a few primary cytoplasmic granules. Markers for this cell are fucosyltransferase FUT4-positive, CD33-positive, integrin alpha-M-negative, low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor III-negative, and CD24-negative.

term: hematopoietic multipotent progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic multipotent progenitor cell is multipotent, but not capable of long-term self-renewal. These cells are characterized as lacking lineage cell surface markers and being CD34-positive in both mice and humans.

term: lymphoid lineage restricted progenitor cell
desc: A progenitor cell restricted to the lymphoid lineage.

term: myeloid lineage restricted progenitor cell
desc: A progenitor cell restricted to the myeloid lineage.

term: immature conventional dendritic cell
desc: An immature cell of the conventional dendritic cell lineage, characterized by high levels of antigen uptake via endocytosis, macropinocytosis, and phagocytosis, and typically found resident in the tissues. Markers for this cell are CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHC-II-low.

term: mature conventional dendritic cell
desc: A mature cell of the conventional dendritic cell lineage, characterized by a high capacity for antigen presentation and typically found in a lymph node.

term: mononuclear cell
desc: A leukocyte with a single non-segmented nucleus in the mature form.

term: follicular B cell
desc: A resting mature B cell that has the phenotype IgM-positive, IgD-positive, CD23-positive and CD21-positive, and found in the B cell follicles of the white pulp of the spleen or the corticol areas of the peripheral lymph nodes. This cell type is also described as being CD19-positive, B220-positive, AA4-negative, CD43-negative, and CD5-negative.

term: germinal center B cell
desc: A rapidly cycling mature B cell that has distinct phenotypic characteristics and is involved in T-dependent immune responses and located typically in the germinal centers of lymph nodes. This cell type expresses Ly77 after activation.

term: marginal zone B cell
desc: A mature B cell that is located in the marginal zone of the spleen with the phenotype CD23-negative and CD21-positive and expressing a B cell receptor usually reactive to bacterial cell wall components or senescent self components such as oxidized-LDL. This cell type is also described as being CD19-positive, B220-positive, IgM-high, AA4-negative, CD35-high.

term: vestibular dark cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the vestibular sensory organ that is characterized by intense enzymatic activities and numerous basal membrane infoldings.

term: ciliated olfactory receptor neuron
desc: An olfactory receptor cell in which the apical ending of the dendrite is a pronounced ciliated olfactory knob.

term: microvillous olfactory receptor neuron
desc: An olfactory receptor cell in which the apical ending of the dendrite is a knob that bears numerous microvilli.

term: crypt olfactory receptor neuron
desc: An olfactory receptor cell with short cilia growing in an invagination bordered by microvilli.

term: serotonergic neuron
desc: A neuron that releases serotonin as a neurotransmitter.

term: neuromast mantle cell
desc: Neuromast mantle cell is a non-sensory cell. Neuromast mantle cells surround the neuromast support cells and neuromast hair cells, separating the neuromast from the epidermis, and secrete cupula in which the ciliary bundles of all the hair cells are embedded.

term: neuromast support cell
desc: Neuromast support cell is a non-sensory cell of the neuromast that extend between the sensory hair cells from the basement membrane to the apical surface; neuromast support cells are surrounded by neuromast mantle cells.

term: olfactory epithelial support cell
desc: Olfactory epithelial support cell is a columnar cell that extends from the epithelial free margin to the basement membrane of the olfactory epithelium. This cell type has a large, vertically, elongate, euchromatic nucleus, along with other nuclei, forms a layer superficial to the cell body of the receptor cell; sends long somewhat irregular microvilli into the mucus layer; at the base, with expanded end-feet containing numerous lamellated dense bodies resembling lipofuscin of neurons.

term: interneuromast cell
desc: Interneuromast cell is a neuroectodermal cell deposited by the migrating lateral line primordium between the neuromasts. Interneuromast cells proliferate and migrate to form additional neuromasts.

term: sensory hair cell
desc: Hair cell is a mechanoreceptor cell that is sensitive to movement of the hair-like projections (stereocilia and kinocilia) which relay the information centrally in the nervous system.

term: neuromast hair cell
desc: Neuromast hair cell is a hair cell that acts as a sensory receptor of the neuromast; it is morphologically polarized as a result of the relative position of the single kinocilium and the clusters of stereocilia on its apical surface.

term: slow muscle myoblast
desc: A skeletal muscle myoblast that differentiates into slow muscle fibers.

term: fast muscle myoblast
desc: A skeletal muscle myoblast that differentiates into fast muscle fibers.

term: classical monocyte
desc: A monocyte that responds rapidly to microbial stimuli by secreting cytokines and antimicrobial factors and which is characterized by high expression of CCR2 in both rodents and humans, negative for the lineage markers CD3, CD19, and CD20, and of larger size than non-classical monocytes.

term: elicited macrophage
desc: A macrophage which develops from an inflammatory monocyte and is recruited into the tissues in response to injury and infection as part of an inflammatory response. Markers include CD11b-positive, CD68-positive, and F4/80-positive.

term: suppressor macrophage
desc: A macrophage that suppresses immune responses.

term: inflammatory macrophage
desc: An elicited macrophage that is recruited into the tissues in response to injury and infection as part of an inflammatory response, expresses high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, ROS and NO, and shows potent microbicidal activity.

term: tissue-resident macrophage
desc: A macrophage constitutively resident in a particular tissue under non-inflammatory conditions, and capable of phagocytosing a variety of extracellular particulate material, including immune complexes, microorganisms, and dead cells.

term: gastrointestinal tract (lamina propria) macrophage
desc: A gut-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage found in lamina propria of the gut.

term: thymic macrophage
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage resident found in the thymus, involved in the clearance of apoptotic thymocytes.

term: secondary lymphoid organ macrophage
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage found in a secondary lymphoid organ.

term: lymph node macrophage
desc: A secondary lymphoid organ macrophage found in a lymph node. This cell is CD169-high.

term: tonsillar macrophage
desc: A gut-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage found in tonsils.

term: Peyer's patch macrophage
desc: A gut-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage found in the Peyer's patches.

term: splenic macrophage
desc: A secondary lymphoid organ macrophage found in the spleen.

term: splenic marginal zone macrophage
desc: A splenic macrophage found in the marginal zone of the spleen, involved in recognition and clearance of particulate material from the splenic circulation. Markers include F4/80-negative, MARCO-positive, SR-A-positive, SIGN-R1-positive, and Dectin2-positive.

term: splenic metallophillic macrophage
desc: A splenic macrophage found in the areas surrounding the white pulp of the spleen, adjacent to the marginal sinus. Markers include F4/80-negative, Dectin2-low, sialoadhesin-positive.

term: splenic red pulp macrophage
desc: A splenic macrophage found in the red-pulp of the spleen, and involved in immune responses to blood-borne pathogens and in the clearance of senescent erythrocytes. Markers include F4/80-positive, CD68-positive, MR-positive, Dectin2-positive, macrosialin-positive, and sialoadhesin-low.

term: non-classical monocyte
desc: A type of monocyte characterized by low expression of CCR2, low responsiveness to monocyte chemoattractant CCL2/MCP1, low phagocytic activity, and decrease size relative to classical monocytes, but increased co-stimulatory activity. May also play a role in tissue repair.

term: splenic white pulp macrophage
desc: A splenic macrophage found in the white pulp of the spleen. Markers include F4/80-negative, CD68-positive, and macrosialin-positive.

term: splenic tingible body macrophage
desc: A splenic white pulp macrophage found in and around the germinal centers of the white pulp of the spleen that participates in phagocytosis of apoptotic B cells from the germinal centers. A marker for a cell of this type is Mertk-positive.

term: central nervous system macrophage
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage found in the central nervous system.

term: meningeal macrophage
desc: A central nervous system macrophage found in the meninges (the three membranes that surround the brain). This macrophage types is highly phagocytic and expresses scavenger receptors.

term: choroid-plexus macrophage
desc: A central nervous system macrophage found at the interface between the blood and the cerebrospinal fluid in the brain. This cell expresses scavenger receptors.

term: perivascular macrophage
desc: A central nervous system macrophage found in small blood vessels in the brain. Markers include CD14+CD16+CD163+.

term: thymic medullary macrophage
desc: A thymic macrophage found in the thymic medulla.

term: thymic cortical macrophage
desc: A thymic macrophage found in the thymic cortex.

term: mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage found in the mucosa associated lymphoid tissue.

term: gut-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage
desc: A mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage found in the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues of the gut.

term: nasal and broncial associated lymphoid tissue macrophage
desc: A mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue macrophage found in the nasal and bronchial mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues.

term: lymph node subcapsular sinus macrophage
desc: A lymph node macrophage found in the subcapsular sinus of lymph nodes that participates in sensing, clearance, and antigen presentation of lymph-borne particulate antigens. This macrophage is capable of activating invaraint NKT cells and is CD169-positive.

term: lymph node tingible body macrophage
desc: A lymph node macrophage found in the cortex of lymph nodes, in particular in and around the germinal centers, and that participates in phagocytosis of apoptotic B cells from the germinal centers.

term: myeloid suppressor cell
desc: An immature myeloid leukocyte of heterogeneous phenotype found particularly in cancer and sepsis patients that is capable of suppressing activity of T cells in ex vivo assays. This cell type is CD45-positive, CD11b-positive.

term: alternatively activated macrophage
desc: An elicited macrophage characterized by low production of pro-inflammatory and Th1 polarizing cytokines and high expression of arginase-1, and associated with tissue remodelling.

term: foam cell
desc: A type of cell containing lipids in small vacuoles and typically seen in atherolosclerotic lesions, as well as other conditions.

term: smooth muscle cell derived foam cell
desc: A type of foam cell derived from a smooth muscle cell containing lipids in small vacuoles and typically seen in atherolosclerotic lesions, as well as other conditions.

term: thymocyte
desc: An immature T cell located in the thymus.

term: DN1 thymic pro-T cell
desc: A pro-T cell that has the phenotype CD4-negative, CD8-negative, CD44-positive, and CD25-negative.

term: naive thymus-derived CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: An antigen inexperienced CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CCR7-positive, CD127-positive and CD62L-positive. This cell type develops in the thymus. This cell type is also described as being CD25-negative, CD62L-high, and CD44-low.

term: activated CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A recently activated CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CD69-positive, CD62L-negative, CD127-negative, and CD25-positive.

term: CD4-positive, alpha-beta memory T cell
desc: CD4-positive, alpha-beta long-lived T cell with the phenotype CD45RO-positive and CD127-positive. This cell type is also described as being CD25-negative, CD44-high, and CD122-high.

term: naive T cell
desc: Mature T cell not yet exposed to antigen with the phenotype CCR7-positive, CD45RA-positive, and CD127-positive. This cell type is also described as being CD25-negative, CD62L-high and CD44-low.

term: T-helper 17 cell
desc: CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype RORgamma-t-positive, CXCR3-negative, CCR6-positive, and capable of producing IL-17.

term: naive thymus-derived CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has not experienced activation via antigen contact and has the phenotype CD45RA-positive, CCR7-positive and CD127-positive. This cell type is also described as being CD25-negative, CD62L-high and CD44-low.

term: Tr1 cell
desc: CD4-positive alpha-beta T cell with regulatory function that produces IL-10.

term: induced T-regulatory cell
desc: CD4-positive alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CD25-positive, CTLA-4-positive, and FoxP3-positive with regulatory function.

term: natural T-regulatory cell
desc: CD4-positive alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype FoxP3-positive, CD25-positive, CD62L-positive, and CTLA-4 positive with regulatory function.

term: central memory CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: CD4-positive, alpha-beta memory T cell with the phenotype CCR7-positive, CD127-positive, CD45RA-negative, CD45RO-positive, and CD25-negative.

term: effector memory CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: CD4-positive, alpha-beta memory T cell with the phenotype CCR7-negative, CD127-positive, CD45RA-negative, CD45RO-positive, and CD25-negative.

term: activated CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CD69-positive, CD62L-negative, CD127-negative, CD25-positive, and CCR7-negative.

term: central memory CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: CD8-positive, alpha-beta memory T cell with the phenotype CCR7-positive, CD127-positive, CD45RA-negative, CD45RO-positive, and CD25-negative.

term: CD8-positive, alpha-beta cytokine secreting effector T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CD69-positive, CD62L-negative, CD127-negative, and CD25-positive, that secretes cytokines.

term: CD8-positive, alpha-beta memory T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell with memory phenotype indicated by being CD45RO and CD127-positive. This cell type is also described as being CD25-negative, CD44-high, and CD122-high.

term: cytotoxic T cell
desc: A mature T cell that differentiated and acquired cytotoxic function with the phenotype perforin-positive and granzyme-B positive.

term: effector T cell
desc: A differentiated T cell with ability to traffic to peripheral tissues and is capable of mounting a specific immune response.

term: helper T cell
desc: A effector T cell that provides help in the form of secreted cytokines to other immune cells.

term: effector memory CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: CD8-positive, alpha-beta memory T cell with the phenotype CCR7-negative, CD127-positive, CD45RA-negative, CD45RO-positive, and CD25-negative.

term: immature NK T cell
desc: An immature alpha-beta T-cell that express Egr2. These cells give rise to T cells expressing NK markers.

term: CD8-alpha-alpha-positive, alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell
desc: An alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell with the phenotype CD8-alpha-alpha-positive located in the columnar epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract. These cells have a memory phenotype of CD2-negative and CD5-negative.

term: dendritic epidermal T cell
desc: A mature gamma-delta T cell located in the epidermis that regulates wound healing.

term: Tc1 cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta positive T cell that has the phenotype T-bet-positive, eomesodermin-positive, CXCR3-positive, CCR6-negative, and is capable of producing interferon-gamma.

term: Tc2 cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta positive T cell expressing GATA-3 and secreting IL-4.

term: CD8-positive, CD25-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell
desc: A CD8-positive alpha beta-positive T cell with the phenotype FoxP3-positive and having suppressor function.

term: CD8-positive, CD28-negative, alpha-beta regulatory T cell
desc: CD8-positive, alpha-beta positive regulatory T cell with the phenotype CD28-negative and FoxP3-positive.

term: type I NK T cell
desc: An alpha-beta T cell expressing NK cell markers that is CD1d restricted and expresses specific V-alpha chains. NK T cells of this type recognize the glycolipid alpha-galactosylceramide in the context of CD1d.

term: type II NK T cell
desc: An alpha-beta T cell expressing NK call markers that is CD1d restricted and expresses a diverse TCR repertoire. Type II NKT cells do not become activated by alpha-galactosylceramide when presented by CD1d.

term: CD4-positive type I NK T cell
desc: A type I NK T cell that has the phenotype CD4-positive.

term: CD4-negative, CD8-negative type I NK T cell
desc: A type I NK T cell that has the phenotype CD4-negative and CD8-negative.

term: activated CD4-positive type I NK T cell
desc: A type I NK T cell that has been recently activated, secretes interferon-gamma and IL-4, and has the phenotype CD4-positive, CD69-positive, and downregulated NK markers.

term: CD4-positive type I NK T cell secreting interferon-gamma
desc: A mature NK T cell that secretes interferon-gamma and enhances type 1 immune responses.

term: CD4-positive type I NK T cell secreting interleukin-4
desc: A mature NK T cell that predominantly secretes type 2 cytokines such as interleukin-4 and interleukin-13 and enhances type 2 immune responses.

term: activated CD4-negative, CD8-negative type I NK T cell
desc: A type I NK T cell that has been recently activated, secretes interferon-gamma and interleukin-4, and has phenotype CD4-negative, CD8-negative, CD69-positive, and downregulated NK markers.

term: CD4-negative, CD8-negative type I NK T cell secreting interferon-gamma
desc: A mature NK T cell that secretes interferon-gamma and enhances Th1 immune responses.

term: CD4-negative, CD8-negative type I NK T cell secreting interleukin-4
desc: A mature NK T cell that secretes interleukin-4 and enhances Th2 immune responses.

term: activated type II NK T cell
desc: A type II NK T cell that has been recently activated, secretes interferon-gamma and interleukin-4, and has the phenotype CD69-positive and downregulated NK markers.

term: type II NK T cell secreting interferon-gamma
desc: A type II NK T cell that has been recently activated, secretes interferon-gamma, and has the phenotype CD69-positive and downregulated NK markers.

term: type II NK T cell secreting interleukin-4
desc: A type II NK T cell that has been recently activated, secretes interleukin-4, and has the phenotype CD69-positive and downregulated NK markers.

term: CD4-positive, alpha-beta cytotoxic T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has cytotoxic function.

term: CD4-negative, CD8-negative, alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A CD4-negative, CD8-negative, alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell that is found in the columnar epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract.

term: early lymphoid progenitor
desc: A lymphoid progenitor cell that is found in bone marrow, gives rise to B cells, T cells, natural killer cells and dendritic cells, and has the phenotype Lin-negative, Kit-positive, Sca-1-positive, FLT3-positive, CD34-positive, CD150 negative, and GlyA-negative.

term: pre-natural killer cell
desc: Cell committed to natural killer cell lineage that has the phenotype CD122-positive, CD34-positive, and CD117-positive. This cell type lacks expression of natural killer receptor proteins.

term: CD16-negative, CD56-bright natural killer cell
desc: NK cell that has the phenotype CD56-bright, CD16-negative, and CD84-positive with the function to secrete interferon-gamma but is not cytotoxic.

term: CD16-positive, CD56-dim natural killer cell
desc: A mature natural killer cell that has the phenotype CD56-low, CD16-positive and which is capable of cytotoxicity and cytokine production.

term: mucosal invariant T cell
desc: An alpha-beta T cell that is found in the lamina propria of mucosal tissues and is restricted by the MR-1 molecule.

term: thymic conventional dendritic cell
desc: A dendritic cell arising in thymus that has the phenotype CD11c-positive, CD11b-negative, and CD45RA-negative.

term: thymic plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: A plasmacytoid dendritic cell developing in the thymus with phenotype CD11c-negative or low, CD45RA-positive, CD11b-negative, and CD123-positive.

term: Be1 Cell
desc: A Be cell that facilitates development of T-helper 1 (Th1) phenotype in CD4-positive T cells, and secretes high levels of interleukin-2, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interferon-gamma.

term: Be2 cell
desc: A Be cell that facilitates development of T-helper 2 (Th2) phenotype T cells, and secretes high levels of interleukin-2, interleukin-10, interleukin-4, and interleukin-6.

term: lymphocyte of B lineage
desc: A lymphocyte of B lineage is a lymphocyte that expresses CD19 on the cell surface. An additional defining characteristic is the commitment to express an immunoglobulin complex.

term: antibody secreting cell
desc: A lymphocyte of B lineage that is devoted to secreting large amounts of immunoglobulin.

term: IgE plasma cell
desc: A long lived plasma cell that secretes IgE.

term: IgE memory B cell
desc: A class switched memory B cell that expresses IgE on the cell surface.

term: IgD plasmablast
desc: A plasmablast that secretes IgD, and which occur in a small proportion of B cells in the adult.

term: IgE plasmablast
desc: A plasmablast that secretes IgE.

term: IgE short lived plasma cell
desc: A short lived plasma cell that secretes IgE.

term: preBCR-positive large pre-B-II cell
desc: An preBRC-positive large pre-B-II cell is a large pre-B-II cell that is pre-B cell receptor-positive, composed of surrogate light chain protein (SL), which is composed of VpreB , Lambda 5/14.1, in complex with immunoglobulin mu heavy chain (IgHmu) on the cell surface.

term: preBCR-negative large pre-B-II cell
desc: A pre-BCR-negative large pre-B-II cell is a large pre-B-II cell that is pre-B cell receptor-negative, composed of surrogate light chain protein (SL), which is composed of VpreB and Lambda 5/14.1, in complex with immunoglobulin mu heavy chain (IgHmu), on the cell surface, and lack a DNA rearrangement of immunoglobulin light chain genes.

term: small pre-B-II cell
desc: A small pre-B-II cell is a pre-B-II cell that is Rag1-positive, Rag2-positive, pre-BCR-negative, and BCR-negative, is not proliferating, and carries a DNA rearrangement of one or more immunoglobulin light chain genes.

term: pre-B-II cell
desc: A pre-B-II cell is a precursor B cell that expresses immunoglobulin mu heavy chain (IgHmu+), and lack expression of CD34, TdT, immunoglobulin kappa light chain and immunoglobulin lambda light chain.

term: pre-B-I cell
desc: A pre-B-I cell is a precursor B cell that expresses CD34 and surrogate immunoglobulin light chain (VpreB , Lambda 5 (mouse)/14.1 (human)) on the cell surface, and TdT, Rag1,and Rag2 intracellularly. Cell type carries a D-JH DNA rearrangement, and lacks expression of immunglobulin heavy chain protein.

term: large pre-B-II cell
desc: A large pre-B-II cell is a pre-B-II cell that is proliferating and is Rag1-negative and Rag2-negative.

term: T1 B cell
desc: A transitional stage B cell that migrates from the bone marrow into the peripheral circulation, and finally to the spleen. This cell type has the phenotype surface IgM-positive, surface IgD-negative, CD21-negative, CD23-negative, and CD62L-negative, and CD93-positive. This cell type has also been described as IgM-high, CD19-positive, B220-positive, AA4-positive, and CD23-negative.

term: T2 B cell
desc: A transitional stage B cell that has the phenotype surface IgM-positive, surface IgD-postive, CD21-positive, CD23-positive, CD62L-negative, CD93-positive and is located in the splenic B follicles. This cell type has also been described as IgM-high, CD19-positive, B220-positive, AA4-positive, and CD23-positive.

term: T3 B cell
desc: A transitional stage B cell that expresses surface IgM and IgD, and CD62L. This cell type appears to be an anergic B cell that does not proliferate upon BCR signaling, is found in the spleen and lymph nodes, and has the phenotype surface IgM-positive, surface IgD-positive, CD21-positive, CD23-positive, CD62L-positive, and CD93-positive. This cell type has also been described as IgM-low, CD19-positive, B220-positive, AA4-positive, and CD23-positive (i.e. this cell-type is distinguished from T2 cells by surface expression of IgM).

term: Bm1 B cell
desc: A follicular B cell that is IgD-positive, CD23-negative, and CD38-negative. This naive cell type is activated in the extrafollicular areas through interaction with interdigitating dendritic cells and antigen-specific CD4-positive T cells.

term: Bm2 B cell
desc: A follicular B cell that is IgD-positive and CD23-positive and CD38-positive. This naive cell type is activated in the extrafollicular areas via interaction with dendritic cells and antigen specific T cells.

term: Bm3-delta B cell
desc: A germinal center B cell that develops from a Bm3 B cell. This cell has the phenotype IgM-negative, IgD-positive, and CD38-positive.

term: Bm2' B cell
desc: A germinal center B cell that founds a germinal center, and has the phenotype IgD-positive, CD38-positive, and CD23-negative.

term: Bm3 B cell
desc: A germinal center B cell that is rapidly dividing and has the phenotype IgD-negative, CD38-positive, and CD77-positive. Somatic hypermutation of the immunoglobulin V gene region can occur during proliferation of this cell type.

term: Bm4 B cell
desc: A germinal center B cell that has the phenotype CD77-negative, IgD-negative, and CD38-positive. These cells have undergone somatic mutation of the B cell receptor.

term: Bm5 B cell
desc: A memory B cell arising in the germinal center that is IgD-negative and has undergone somatic mutation of the variable region of the immunoglobulin heavy and light chain genes.

term: Be cell
desc: A mature B cell that produces cytokines that can influence CD4 T cell differentiation.

term: regulatory B cell
desc: A mature B cell that has the phenotype CD1d-positive and expresses interleukin-10. This cell type has been associated with suppression of chronic inflammatory responses and T cell responses.

term: unswitched memory B cell
desc: An unswitched memory B cell is a memory B cell that has the phenotype IgM-positive, IgD-positive, CD27-positive, CD138-negative, IgG-negative, IgE-negative, and IgA-negative.

term: IgM memory B cell
desc: An IgM memory B cell is an unswitched memory B cell with the phenotype IgM-positive and IgD-negative.

term: class switched memory B cell
desc: A class switched memory B cell is a memory B cell that has undergone Ig class switching and therefore is IgM-negative on the cell surface. These cells are CD27-positive and have either IgG, IgE, or IgA on the cell surface.

term: IgA memory B cell
desc: A class switched memory B cell that expresses IgA.

term: long lived plasma cell
desc: A fully differentiated plasma cell that lives for years, as opposed to months, secretes immunoglobulin, and has the phenotype weakly CD19-positive, CD20-negative, CD38-negative, strongly CD138-positive, MHC Class II-negative, surface immunoglobulin-negative, IgD-negative, and strongly CXCR4-positive. The majority of these cells of this type reside in the bone marrow.

term: short lived plasma cell
desc: A fully differentiated plasma cell that lives for months.

term: IgA short lived plasma cell
desc: A short lived plasma cell that secretes IgA. These cells may be found in the bone marrow as well as in the mucosal immune system.

term: IgG short lived plasma cell
desc: A short lived plasma cell that secretes IgG.

term: IgM short lived plasma cell
desc: A short lived plasma cell that secretes IgM.

term: IgG memory B cell
desc: An IgG memory B cell is a class switched memory B cell that is class switched and expresses IgG on the cell surface.

term: plasmablast
desc: An activated mature (naive or memory) B cell that is secreting immunoglobulin, typified by being CD27-positive, CD38-positive, CD138-negative.

term: double negative memory B cell
desc: A memory B cell with the phenotype IgD-negative and CD27-negative.

term: IgG plasmablast
desc: A plasmablast that secretes IgG.

term: IgM plasmablast
desc: A plasmablast that secretes IgM.

term: IgA plasmablast
desc: A plasmablast that secretes IgA.

term: IgG plasma cell
desc: A fully differentiated plasma cell that secretes IgG.

term: IgM plasma cell
desc: A fully differentiated plasma cell that secretes IgM.

term: IgA plasma cell
desc: A fully differentiated plasma cell that secretes IgA.

term: hematopoietic cell
desc: A cell of a hematopoietic lineage.

term: CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell is a leukocyte that is CD11c-low, CD45R-positive, GR1-positive and CD11b-negative.

term: conventional dendritic cell
desc: Conventional dendritic cell is a dendritic cell that is CD11c-high.

term: CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell is a leukocyte is CD11c-negative, CD45RA-positive, CD85g-positive(ILT7), CD123-positive, CD303-positive.

term: immature CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: Immature CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell is a CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell that is CD80-low and CD86-low.

term: mature CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: Mature CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell is a CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell that is CD83-high and is CD80-positive, CD86-positive, and MHCII-positive.

term: immature CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: Immature CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell is a CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell is CD80-negative, CD86-low and MHCII-low.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-positive common myeloid progenitor OR CD34-positive, CD38-positive common lymphoid progenitor
desc: 

term: mature CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell
desc: Mature CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell is a CD11c-negative plasmacytoid dendritic cell is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: immature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell
desc: Immature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell is a CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell
desc: CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell is a conventional dendritic cell that is CD11b-negative, CD4-negative CD8_alpha-negative and is CD205-positive. This cell is able to cross- present antigen to CD8-alpha-positive T cells.

term: CD4-positive CD11b-positive dendritic cell
desc: CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell is a conventional dendritic cell that is CD11b-positive, CD4-positive and is CD205-negative and CD8_alpha-negative.

term: CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell
desc: CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell is a conventional dendritic cell that is CD11b-negative, CD4-negative and is CD205-positive and CD8_alpha-positive.

term: immature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell
desc: Immature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell is a CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell
desc: Mature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell is a CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-negative dendritic cell that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: mature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell
desc: Mature CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell is a CD8_alpha-negative CD11b-positive dendritic cell that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: immature CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell
desc: Immature CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell is a CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell
desc: Mature CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell is a CD8_alpha-positive CD11b-negative dendritic cell that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: dermal dendritic cell
desc: Dermal dendritic cell is a conventional dendritic cell that is CD11b-positive, CD205-positive and CD8 alpha-negative.

term: interstitial dendritic cell
desc: Interstitial dendritic cell is a conventional dendritic cell that is CD11b-positive, CD1a-positive, CD206-positive, CD209-positive, and CD36-positive.

term: Kit and Sca1-positive hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell that has plasma membrane part Kit-positive, SCA-1-positive, CD150-positive and CD34-negative.

term: immature dermal dendritic cell
desc: Immature dermal dendritic cell is a dermal dendritic cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature dermal dendritic cell
desc: Mature dermal dendritic cell is a dermal dendritic cell that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: immature interstitial dendritic cell
desc: Immature interstitial dendritic cell is a interstitial dendritic cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: CD7-negative lymphoid progenitor OR granulocyte monocyte progenitor
desc: 

term: mature interstitial dendritic cell
desc: Mature interstitial dendritic cell is a interstitial dendritic cell that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: CD1a-positive Langerhans cell
desc: CD1a-positive Langerhans cell is a Langerhans_cell that is CD1a-positive and CD324-positive.

term: CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell
desc: CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell is a Langerhans cell that is CD205-high and is CD8_alpha-low.

term: immature CD1a-positive Langerhans cell
desc: Immature CD1a-positive Langerhans cell is a CD1a-positive Langerhans cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature CD1a-positive Langerhans cell
desc: Mature CD1a-positive Langerhans cell is a CD1a-positive Langerhans cell that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: immature CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell
desc: Immature CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell is a CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell that is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: CD115-positive monocyte OR common dendritic progenitor
desc: 

term: mature CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell
desc: Mature CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell is a CD8_alpha-low Langerhans cell that that is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-positive common lymphoid progenitor
desc: A common lymphoid progenitor that is CD10-positive, CD45RA-positive, CD34-positive and CD38-positive.

term: CD115-positive monocyte
desc: CD115-positive monocyte is a monocyte that is CD115-positive and CD11b-positive.

term: Kit-positive, CD34-positive common myeloid progenitor
desc: A common myeloid progenitor that is Kit-positive and CD34-positive, Il7ra-negative, and is SCA1-low and Fcgr2-low and Fcgr3-low.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-negative hematopoietic stem cell
desc: CD133-positive hematopoietic stem cell is a hematopoietic stem cell that is CD34-positive, CD90-positive, and CD133-positive.

term: Kit-positive, Sca1-positive common lymphoid progenitor
desc: A common lymphoid progenitor that is Kit-low, FLT3-positive, IL7ralpha-positive, and SCA1-low.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-positive common myeloid progenitor
desc: A common myeloid progenitor that is CD34-positive, CD38-positive, IL3ra-low, CD10-negative, CD7-negative, CD45RA-negative, and IL-5Ralpha-negative.

term: CD7-negative lymphoid progenitor cell
desc: CD7-negative lymphoid progenitor cell is a lymphoid progenitor cell that is CD34-positive, CD7-negative and CD45RA-negative.

term: CD7-positive lymphoid progenitor cell
desc: CD7-positive lymphoid progenitor cell is a lymphoid progenitor cell that is CD34-positive, CD7-positive and is CD45RA-negative.

term: common dendritic progenitor
desc: Common dendritic precursor is a hematopoietic progenitor cell that is CD117-low, CD135-positive, CD115-positive and lacks plasma membrane parts for hematopoietic lineage markers.

term: CD117-positive common myeloid progenitor OR CD217-positive common lymphoid progenitor
desc: 

term: cerebellar granule cell
desc: Granule cell that is part of the cerebellum.

term: cortical granule cell
desc: Granule cell that is part of the cerebral cortex.

term: hippocampal granule cell
desc: Granule cell that is part of the hippocampus.

term: cell in vitro
desc: A cell that is maintained or propagated in a controlled artificial environment for use in an investigation.

term: bone cell
desc: A connective tissue cell found in bone.

term: terminally differentiated osteoblast
desc: Osteoblast that is terminally differentiated, located adjacent to acellular or cellular bone tissue within periosteum, and is capable of mineralizing the matrix.

term: non-terminally differentiated osteoblast
desc: Osteoblast that is non-terminally differentiated and located in cellular bone tissue or under the periosteum in acellular bone.

term: CD8-positive, CXCR3-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell
desc: A CD8-positive alpha-beta-positive T cell with the phenotype CXCR3-positive and having suppressor function. They are capable of producing IL-10, suppressing proliferation, and suppressing IFN-gamma production.

term: T-helper 22 cell
desc: CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that produces IL-22.

term: activated CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell, human
desc: A recently activated CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype HLA-DRA-positive, CD38-positive, CD69-positive, CD62L-negative, CD127-negative, and CD25-positive.

term: effector CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CCR7-negative, CD45RA-positive.

term: naive CCR4-positive regulatory T cell
desc: A naive regulatory T cell with the phenotype CD4-positive, CD25-positive, CD127lo, CCR4-positive, and CD45RO-negative.

term: memory CCR4-positive regulatory T cell
desc: A memory regulatory T cell with phenotype CD4-positive, CD25-positive, CD127lo, CCR4-positive, and CD45RO-positive.

term: CD4-positive, CD25-positive, CCR4-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, CD25-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell with the additional phenotype CCR4-positive.

term: activated CD4-positive, CD25-positive, CCR4-positive, alpha-beta regulatory T cell, human
desc: A CD4-positive, CD25-positive, CCR4-positive, alpha-beta T regulatory cell with the phenotype HLA-DRA-positive, indicating recent activation.

term: activated CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell, human
desc: A recently activated CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype HLA-DRA-positive, CD38-positive, CD69-positive, CD62L-negative, CD127-negative, CCR7-negative, and CD25-positive.

term: effector CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell with the phenotype CCR7-negative, CD45RA-positive.

term: CD4-positive, CXCR3-negative, CCR6-negative, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has the phenotype CXCR3-negative, CCR6-negative.

term: CD8-positive, CXCR3-negative, CCR6-negative, alpha-beta T cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has the phenotype CXCR3-negative, CCR6-negative.

term: IgD-negative memory B cell
desc: A memory B cell that lacks expression of surface IgD.

term: CD14-positive monocyte
desc: A monocyte that expresses CD14 and is negative for the lineage markers CD3, CD19, and CD20.

term: CD14-positive, CD16-low monocyte
desc: An intermediate monocyte that is CD14-positive and with low amounts of CD16.

term: dendritic cell, human
desc: A dendritic cell with the phenotype HLA-DRA-positive.

term: myeloid dendritic cell, human
desc: A myeloid dendritic cell with the phenotype HLA-DRA-positive.

term: plasmacytoid dendritic cell, human
desc: A plasmacytoid dendritic cell with the phenotype HLA-DRA-positive, CD123-positive, and CD11c-negative.

term: common myeloid progenitor, CD34-positive
desc: A progenitor cell committed to myeloid lineage, including the megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages. These cells are CD34-positive, and express Gata1, Gata2, C/EBPa, and Pu.1.

term: hematopoietic oligopotent progenitor cell, lineage-negative
desc: A hematopoietic oligopotent progenitor cell that has the ability to differentiate into limited cell types but lacks lineage cell markers and self renewal capabilities. Cell lacks hematopoeitic lineage markers.

term: abnormal cell
desc: A cell found in an organism or derived from an organism exhibiting a phenotype that deviates from the expected phenotype of any native cell type of that organism. Abnormal cells are typically found in disease states or disease models.

term: effector memory CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell, terminally differentiated
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha beta memory T cell with the phenotype CD45RA-positive, CD45RO-negative, and CCR7-negative.

term: neoplastic cell
desc: An abnormal cell exhibiting dysregulation of cell proliferation or programmed cell death and capable of forming a neoplasm, an aggregate of cells in the form of a tumor mass or an excess number of abnormal cells (liquid tumor) within an organism.

term: malignant cell
desc: A neoplastic cell that is capable of entering a surrounding tissue

term: innate lymphoid cell
desc: A lymphocyte that lacks characteristic T cell, B cell, myeloid cell, and dendritic cell markers, that functions as part of the innate immune response to produce cytokines and other effector responses.

term: erythroid progenitor cell, mammalian
desc: A progenitor cell committed to the erythroid lineage. This cell is ter119-positive but lacks expression of other hematopoietic lineage markers (lin-negative).

term: group 1 innate lymphoid cell
desc: An innate lymphoid cell that is capable of producing the type 1 cytokine IFN-gamma, but not Th2 or Th17 cell-associated cytokines.

term: ILC1
desc: A group 1 innate lymphoid cell that is non-cytotoxic.

term: group 2 innate lymphoid cell
desc: An innate lymphoid cell that is capable of producing T-helper 2-cell associated cytokines upon stimulation.

term: beige adipocyte
desc: A fat cell that is beige in color, thermogenic, and which differentiates in white fat tissue from a Myf5-negative progenitor.

term: group 3 innate lymphoid cell
desc: An innate lymphoid cell that constituitively expresses RORgt and is capable of expressing IL17A and/or IL-22.

term: visual pigment cell (sensu Nematoda and Protostomia)
desc: 

term: Kit-positive erythroid progenitor cell
desc: An erythroid progenitor cell is Kit-positive, Ly6A-negative, CD41-negative, CD127-negative, and CD123-negative. This cell type is also described as being lin-negative, Kit-positive, CD150-negative, CD41-negative, CD105-positive, and FcgR-negative.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-positive granulocyte monocyte progenitor
desc: A granulocyte monocyte progenitor is CD34-positive, CD38-positive, IL-3receptor-alpha-positive and is CD45RA-negative.

term: Kit-positive granulocyte monocyte progenitor
desc: A granulocyte monocyte progenitor that is Kit-positive, CD34-positive, Fc-gamma receptor II/II-positive, and is Sca-1-negative, Il7ra-negative, Cxc3r1-negative, and CD90-negative.

term: CD34-positive, GlyA-negative erythroid progenitor cell
desc: An erythroid progenitor cell that is CD34-positive and is GlyA-negative.

term: CD34-negative, GlyA-negative proerythroblast
desc: A proerythoblast that is CD34-negative and GlyA-negative.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-positive megakaryocyte erythroid progenitor cell
desc: A megakaryocyte erythroid progenitor cell is CD34-positive, CD38-positive and is IL3-receptor alpha-negative and CD45RA-negative.

term: Kit-positive, CD34-negative megakaryocyte erythroid progenitor cell
desc: A megakaryocyte erythroid progenitor cell that is Kit-positive and is Sca1-negative, CD34-negative, CD90-negative, IL7r-alpha-negative and Fcgr II/III-low.

term: Kit-low, CD34-positive eosinophil progenitor cell
desc: A lineage marker-negative, CD34-positive, IL5r-alpha-positive, and Sca1-negative eosinophil progenitor cell.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-positive eosinophil progenitor cell
desc: A lineage marker-negative, CD34-positive, CD38-positive, IL3r-alpha-positive, IL5r-alpha-positive, and CD45RA-negative eosinophil progenitor cell.

term: macrophage dendritic cell progenitor
desc: A progenitor cell that can give rise to plasmacytoid and myeloid dendritic cells, and to monocytes and macrophages.

term: pre-conventional dendritic cell
desc: A lin-negative, MHC-II-negative, CD11c-positive, FLT3-positive cell with intermediate expression of SIRP-alpha.

term: Kit-positive macrophage dendritic cell progenitor
desc: A progenitor cell that can give rise to plasmacytoid and myeloid dendritic cells, and to monocytes and macrophages. Marker for this cell is Kit-high, CD115-positive, CD135-positive, Cx3cr1-positive, and is Il7ra-negative.

term: Kit-low proerythroblast
desc: A proerythoblast that is Kit-low, Lyg76-positive, and CD71-positive.

term: GlyA-positive basophillic erythroblast
desc: A basophilic erythroblast that is GlyA-positive.

term: Kit-negative, Ly-76 high basophilic erythroblast
desc: A basophilic erythroblast that is Lyg 76-high and is Kit-negative.

term: Kit-negative, Ly-76 high polychromatophilic erythroblast
desc: A polychromatophilic erythroblast that is Lyg 76-high and is Kit-negative.

term: CD71-low, GlyA-positive polychromatic erythroblast
desc: A polychromatiic erythroblast that is Gly-A-positive and CD71-low.

term: Kit-negative, Ly-76 high orthochromatophilic erythroblasts
desc: An orthochromatophilic erythroblast that is ter119-high, CD71-low, and Kit-negative.

term: CD71-negative, GlyA-positive orthochromatic erythroblast
desc: An erythroblast that is GlyA-positive and CD71-negative.

term: Ly-76 high reticulocyte
desc: A reticulocyte that is Ly76-high and is Kit-negative.

term: GlyA-positive reticulocytes
desc: A reticulocyte that is GlyA-positive.

term: GlyA-positive erythrocyte
desc: An enucleate erythrocyte that is GlyA-positive.

term: Ly-76 high positive erythrocyte
desc: An enucleate erythrocyte that is Lyg-76-high.

term: CD34-positive, CD41-positive, CD42-positive megakaryocyte progenitor cell
desc: A megakaroycotye progenitor cell that is CD34-positive, CD41-positive and CD42-positive on the cell surface.

term: Kit-positive megakaryocyte progenitor cell
desc: A megakaryocyte progenitor cell that is Kit-positive, CD41-positive, CD9-positive, Sca-1-negative, IL7ralpha-negative, CD150-negative, and Fcgamma receptor II/III-low.

term: CD34-positive, CD41-positive, CD42-negative megakaryocyte progenitor cell
desc: A megakaryocyte progenitor cell that is CD34-positive, CD41-positive, and CD42-negative.

term: CD34-negative, CD41-positive, CD42-positive megakaryocyte cell
desc: A megakaryocyte progenitor cell that is CD34-negative, CD41-positive and CD42-positive.

term: CD9-positive, CD41-positive megakaryocyte cell
desc: A megakaryocyte cell with is CD9-positive and CD41-positive.

term: basophil mast progenitor cell
desc: A cell type that can give rise to basophil and mast cells. This cell is CD34-positive, CD117-positive, CD125-positive, FceRIa-negative, and T1/ST2-negative, and expresses Gata-1, Gata-2, C/EBPa

term: Fc-epsilon RIalpha-low mast cell progenitor
desc: A lineage-negative, Kit-positive, CD45-positive mast cell progenitor that is Fc-epsilon RIalpha-low.

term: Fc-epsilon RIalpha-high basophil progenitor cell
desc: A lineage negative, Sca1-negative basophil progenitor cell that is Fc epsilon RIalpha-high.

term: hematopoietic lineage restricted progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic progenitor cell that is capable of developing into only one lineage of hematopoietic cells.

term: hematopoietic oligopotent progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic oligopotent progenitor cell that has the ability to differentiate into limited cell types but lacks lineage cell markers and self renewal capabilities. Cell lacks hematopoeitic lineage markers.

term: short term hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell capable of rapid replenishment of myeloerythroid progenitors and limited self renewal capability. This cell is Kit-positive, Sca1-positive, CD34-positive, CD150-positive, and is Flt3-negative.

term: long term hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell with long term self renewal capability. This cell is Kit-positive, Sca1-positive, CD150-positive, CD90-low, CD34-negative and Flt3-negative.

term: Slamf1-negative multipotent progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic progenitor that has restricted self-renewal capability. Cell is Kit-positive, Ly6-positive, CD150-negative and Flt3-negative.

term: Slamf1-positive multipotent progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic progenitor that has some limited self-renewal capability. Cells are lin-negative, Kit-positive, CD34-positive, and Slamf1-positive.

term: CD2-positive, CD5-positive, CD44-positive alpha-beta intraepithelial T cell
desc: Intraepithelial T cells with a memory phenotype of CD2-positive, CD5-positive, and CD44-positive.

term: T follicular helper cell
desc: A CD4-positive, CXCR5-positive, CCR7-negative alpha-beta T cell located in follicles of secondary lymph nodes that expresses is BCL6-high, ICOS-high and PD1-high, and stimulates follicular B cells to undergo class-switching and antibody production.

term: immature NK T cell stage I
desc: A CD24-high, CD4-low, CD8-low, CD44-negative, NK1.1-negative NK T cell.

term: immature NK T cell stage II
desc: A CD24-low, CD44-negative, NK1.1-negative NK T cell.

term: immature NK T cell stage III
desc: A CD24-low, CD44-positive, DX5-low, NK1.1-negative NK T cell.

term: immature NK T cell stage IV
desc: A CD24-low, CD44-positive, DX5-high, NK1.1-negative NK T cell.

term: CD34-positive, CD38-negative multipotent progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic multipotent progenitor cell that is CD34-positive, CD38-negative, CD45RA-negative, and CD90-negative.

term: Kit-positive, integrin beta7-high basophil mast progenitor cell
desc: A basophil mast progenitor cell that is Beta-7 integrin-high, Kit-positive FcRgammaII/III-positive and Sca1-negative.

term: Fraction A pre-pro B cell
desc: A pro-B cell that CD45R/B220-positive, CD43-positive, HSA-low, BP-1-negative and Ly6c-negative. This cell type is also described as being lin-negative, AA4-positive, Kit-positive, IL7Ra-positive and CD45R-positive.

term: early pro-B cell
desc: A pro-B cell that is CD22-positive, CD34-positive, CD38-positive and TdT-positive (has TdT activity). Pre-BCR is expressed on the cell surface. Cell is CD19-negative, CD20-negative, complement receptor type 2-negative and CD10-low. D-to-J recombination of the heavy chain occurs at this stage.

term: Fraction B precursor B cell
desc: A precursor B cell that is CD45RA-positive, CD43-positive, CD24-positive and BP-1-negative.

term: late pro-B cell
desc: A pre-B cell precursor is CD19-low, CD22-positive , CD34-positive, CD38-positive.

term: Fraction C precursor B cell
desc: A precursor B cell is CD45R-positive, CD43-positive, CD24-positive, and BP-positive. Intracellularly expression of surrogate light chain, Rag1 and Rag2, TdT, occurs while there is no expression of mu heavy chain.

term: Fraction C' precursor B cell
desc: A pre-BCR-positive precursor B cell that is CD24-high, CD25-positive, CD43-positive, CD45R-positive and BP-positive.

term: CD38-high pre-BCR positive cell
desc: A pre-BCR positive T cell that is CD38-high.

term: Fraction D precursor B cell
desc: A pre-B cell that is pre-BCR-negative, and the kappa- and lambda- light immunoglobulin light chain-negative, CD43-low, and is BP-1-positive, CD45R-positive and CD25-positive. This cell type is also described as being AA4-positive, IgM-negative, CD19-positive, CD43-low/negative, and HSA-positive.

term: CD22-positive, CD38-low small pre-B cell
desc: A small pre-B cell that is CD22-positive and CD38-low.

term: Fraction E immature B cell
desc: An immature B cell that is IgM-positive, CD45R-positive, CD43-low, CD25-negative, and CD127-negative. This cell type has also been described as being AA4-positive, IgM-positive, CD19-positive, CD43-low/negative, and HSA-positive.

term: CD38-negative immature B cell
desc: An immature B cell that is CD38-negative, CD10-low, CD21-low, and CD22-high.

term: Fraction F mature B cell
desc: A mature B cell subset originally defined as having being CD45R-positive, IgM-positive, IgD-positive and CD43-negative. Subsequent research demonstrated being CD21-positive and CD23-negative and CD93 negative.

term: CD14-positive, CD16-negative classical monocyte
desc: A classical monocyte that is CD14-positive, CD16-negative, CD64-positive, CD163-positive.

term: Gr1-low non-classical monocyte
desc: A resident monocyte that is Gr-1 low, CD43-positive, and CX3CR1-positive.

term: CD8alpha-positive thymic conventional dendritic cell
desc: A conventional thymic dendritic cell that is CD8alpha-positive.

term: melanophage
desc: A melanin-containing macrophage that obtains the pigment by phagocytosis of melanosomes.

term: T-helper 9 cell
desc: A T-helper cell that is characterized by secreting interleukin 9 and responding to helminth infections. This cell-type can derives from Th2 cells in the presence of TGF-beta and IL-4. Th2 cytokine production is surpressed.

term: type I pneumocyte
desc: A type I pneumocyte is a flattened, branched pneumocyte that covers more than 98% of the alveolar surface. This large cell has thin (50-100 nm) cytoplasmic extensions to form the air-blood barrier essential for normal gas exchange.

term: type II pneumocyte
desc: A type II pneumocyte is a pneumocyte that modulates the fluid surrounding the alveolar epithelium by secreting and recycling surfactants. This cell type also contributes to tissue repair and can differentiate after injury into a type I pneumocyte. Thicker than squamous alveolar cells, have a rounded apical surface that projects above the level of surrounding epithelium. The free surface is covered by short microvilli.

term: pancreatic acinar cell
desc: A secretory cell found in pancreatic acini that secretes digestive enzymes and mucins. This cell is a typical zymogenic cell, have a basal nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm consisting of regular arrays of granular endoplasmic reticulum with mitochondria and dense secretory granules.

term: Feyrter cell
desc: A neuroendocrine cell found in the epithelium of the lungs and respiratory tract. This cell type is rounded or elliptical in shape, situated mainly in the basal part of the epithelium; regulates bronchial secretion, smooth muscle contraction, lobular growth, ciliary activity and chemoreception. Cell has an electron-lucent cytoplasm, contains numerous dense-cored vesicles with a clear halo between the core and the limiting membrane.

term: type A enterocrine cell
desc: An enterocrine cell that produces glucagon.

term: Purkinje myocyte
desc: Specialized cardiac myocyte that is subendocardially interspersed with the regular cardiac muscle cell. They are uninucleate cylindrical cells, associated end-to-end in long rows, continue from the node to the atrioventricular bundle; relatively short compared to ordinary myocytes but are nearly twice their diameter.

term: type II vestibular sensory cell
desc: Mostly cylindrical, resemble Type 1 in their contents and the presence of a kinocilium and stereocilium apically; much greater variation in size, some almost span the entire thickness of the sensory epithelium, while others are smaller than Type 1; receive multiple efferent nerve boutons around their bases as well as afferent endings, which are small expansions rather than chalices.

term: type I vestibular sensory cell
desc: Bottle-shaped with narrow neck; broad, rounded basal portion where nucleus is located; stereocilia and a single kinocilium is present apically; receive nerve bouton at their base from an afferent cup-shaped (chalice or calyx) nerve ending.

term: enterocyte of epithelium of large intestine
desc: Columnar cell which populate the epithelium of large intestine and absorb water. This cell is the most numerous of the epithelial cell types in the large intestine; bear apical microvilli, contain secretory granules in their apical cytoplasm; secretion appears to be largely mucins, but is also rich in antibodies of the IgA type.

term: nodal myocyte
desc: A specialized cardiac myocyte in the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes. The cell is slender and fusiform confined to the nodal center, circumferentially arranged around the nodal artery.

term: transitional myocyte
desc: Specialized cardiac myocyte which is in the internodal tract and atrioventricular node. The cell is more slender than ordinary atrial myocytes and has more myofibrils than nodal myocytes.

term: myocardial endocrine cell
desc: The myoendocrine cellis a specialized myocyte localized mainly in the right and left atrial appendages, and also scattered within other areas of the atria and along the conductive system in the ventricular septum. The most conspicuous feature distinguishing myoendocrine cells from other atrial myoctyes is the presence of membane-bounded secretory granules (these granules contain precursor of cardiodilatins or atrial natriuretic polypeptides).

term: brush cell of trachebronchial tree
desc: Infrequent type of columnar epithelial cell. This cell is characterized by the presence of a tuft of blunt, squat microvilli (approximately 120-140/cell) on the cell surface. The microvilli contain filaments that stretch into the underlying cytoplasm. They have a distinctive pear shape with a wide base and a narrow microvillous apex. Function not known.

term: endo-epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell derived from endoderm.

term: ecto-epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell derived from ectoderm.

term: meso-epithelial cell
desc: Epithelial cell derived from mesoderm or mesenchyme.

term: pancreatic ductal cell
desc: Epithelial cell found in the ducts of the pancreas. This cell type contributes to the high luminal pH.

term: pancreatic centro-acinar cell
desc: A cubodial epithelial cell that is continuous with the lining of intercalated ducts that drain the acinus. This cell type secretes a high pH solution to aid in activation of zymogens, and can differentiate into endocrine and exocrine pancreatic cell types.

term: type II cell of carotid body
desc: This cell resembles a glia cell, express the glial marker S100 and act as a supporting cell to type I cell. This cell is located in a small cluster of type I and type II cells near the fork of the carotid artery.

term: type II cell of adrenal medulla
desc: A chromaffin cell of the adrenal medulla that produces epinephrine.

term: type I cell of adrenal medulla
desc: A chromaffin cell of the adrenal medulla that produces norepinephrine.

term: Boettcher cell
desc: A Boettcher cell is a polyhedral cells on the basilar membrane of the cochlea, and is located beneath Claudius cells. A Boettcher cell is considered a supporting cell for the organ of Corti, and is present only in the lower turn of the cochlea. These cells interweave with each other, and project microvilli into the intercellular space. Because of their structural specialization, a Boettcher cell is believed to play a significant role in the function of the cochlea. They demonstrate high levels of calmodulin, and may be involved in mediating Ca(2+) regulation and ion transport.

term: tanycyte
desc: Specialized elongated ventricular ependymal cell that has processes that extend to the outer, or pial, surface of the CNS. Resemble spongioblasts seen in developing brain. Found in the adult brain in the third ventricle, cerebral aqueduct, spinal canal and floor of the fourth ventricle.

term: specialized cardiac myocyte
desc: A cardiac myocyte that is an excitable cells in the myocardium, specifically in the conducting system of heart.

term: nongranular leukocyte
desc: A leukocyte that lacks granules.

term: interstitial cell of Cajal
desc: This is a cell found in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals and serves as a pacemaker that triggers gut contraction. ICCs mediate inputs from the enteric nervous system to smooth muscle cells and are thought to be the cells from which gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) arise.

term: group 2 innate lymphoid cell, mouse
desc: A group 2 innate lymphoid cell in the mouse capable of secreting IL-13 in response to a helminth infection. This cell is lineage-negative, ICOS-positive, IL1RL1-positive, IL7Ralpha-positive, and IL17Br-positive.

term: polar body
desc: One of two small cells formed by the first and second meiotic division of oocytes.

term: primary polar body
desc: A small cell formed by the first meiotic division of oocytes.

term: bone marrow cell
desc: A cell found in the bone marrow. This can include fibroblasts, macrophages, adipocytes, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, endothelial cells and hematopoietic cells.

term: secondary polar body
desc: A small cell formed by the second meiotic division of oocytes. In mammals, the second polar body may fail to form unless the ovum has been penetrated by a sperm cell.

term: interstitial cell of ovary
desc: A cell that makes up the loose connective tissue of the ovary.

term: hilus cell of ovary
desc: A cell in the hilum of the ovary that produces androgens.

term: internodal tract myocyte
desc: A specialised myocyte that lies between the sinoatrial node and the atrioventricular node and is involved in the conduction of electrical signals.

term: cortical cell of adrenal gland
desc: A cell of the adrenal cortex. Cell types include those that synthesize and secrete chemical derivatives (steroids) of cholesterol.

term: regular cardiac myocyte
desc: A cardiac myocyte that is connected to other cardiac myocytes by transverse intercalated discs (GO:0014704) at a regular interval.

term: type I cell of adrenal cortex
desc: A small, polyhedral, cell found in rounded groups or curved columns with deeply staining nuclei, scanty basophilic cytoplasm and a few lipid droplets. This cell in the zona glomerulosa produces mineralocorticoids.

term: regular interventricular cardiac myocyte
desc: A regular cardiac myocyte of the interventricular region of the heart.

term: CD38-positive naive B cell
desc: A CD38-positive naive B cell is a mature B cell that has the phenotype CD38-positive, surface IgD-positive, surface IgM-positive, and CD27-negative, and that has not yet been activated by antigen in the periphery.

term: CD38-negative naive B cell
desc: A CD38-negative naive B cell is a mature B cell that has the phenotype CD38-negative, surface IgD-positive, surface IgM-positive, and CD27-negative, that has not yet been activated by antigen in the periphery.

term: IgG-positive double negative memory B cell
desc: An IgG-positive double negative memory B cell is a double negative memory B cell with the phenotype IgG-positive, IgD-negative, and CD27-negative.

term: IgG-negative double negative memory B cell
desc: An IgG-negative double negative memory B cell is a double negative memory B cell with the phenotype IgG-negative, IgD-negative, and CD27-negative.

term: CD38-positive IgG memory B cell
desc: A CD38-positive IgG memory B cell is a class switched memory B cell that expresses IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype CD38-positive and IgG-positive.

term: IgD-positive CD38-positive IgG memory B cell
desc: An IgD-positive CD38-positive IgG memory B cell is a CD38-positive IgG-positive class switched memory B cell that has class switched and expresses IgD on the cell surface with the phenotype IgD-positive, CD38-positive, and IgG-positive.

term: IgD-negative CD38-positive IgG memory B cell
desc: An IgD-negative CD38-positive IgG memory B cell is a CD38-positive IgG-positive that has class switched and lacks expression of IgD on the cell surface with the phenotype IgD-negative, CD38-positive, and IgG-positive.

term: CD38-negative IgG memory B cell
desc: A CD38-negative IgG memory B cell is a IgG-positive class switched memory B cell that has class switched and expresses IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype CD38-negative, IgD-negative, and IgG-positive.

term: B220-positive CD38-positive naive B cell
desc: A B220-positive CD38-positive naive B cell is a CD38-positive naive B cell that has the phenotype B220-positive, CD38-positive, surface IgD-positive, surface IgM-positive, and CD27-negative, and that has not yet been activated by antigen in the periphery.

term: B220-low CD38-positive naive B cell
desc: A B220-low CD38-positive naive B cell is a CD38-positive naive B cell that has the phenotype B220-low, CD38-positive, surface IgD-positive, surface IgM-positive, and CD27-negative, that has not yet been activated by antigen in the periphery.

term: CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell
desc: An CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell is an unswitched memory B cell that has the phenotype CD38-negative, IgD-positive, CD138-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: B220-positive CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell
desc: A B220-positive CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell is a CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell that has the phenotype B220-positive, CD38-negative, IgD-positive, CD138-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: B220-low CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell
desc: A B220-low CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell is a CD38-negative unswitched memory B cell that has the phenotype B220-low, CD38-negative, IgD-positive, CD138-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell
desc: A CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell is an unswitched memory B cell that has the phenotype CD38-positive, IgD-positive, CD138-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: B220-positive CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell
desc: A B220-positive CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell is a CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell that has the phenotype B220-positive, CD38-positive, IgD-positive, CD138-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: B220-low CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell
desc: A B220-low CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell is a CD38-positive unswitched memory B cell that has the phenotype B220-low, CD38-positive, IgD-positive, CD138-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: A class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface.

term: CD38-negative IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: A CD38-negative IgG-negative memory B cell is a IgG-negative class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype CD38-negative and IgG-negative.

term: CD38-positive IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: A CD38-positive IgG-negative memory B cell is an IgG-negative class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype CD38-positive and IgG-negative.

term: CD24-positive CD38-negative IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: An CD24-positive CD38-negative IgG-negative memory B cell is a CD38-negative IgG-negative class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype CD24-positive, CD38-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: CD24-negative CD38-negative IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: A CD24-negative CD38-negative IgG-negative memory B cell is a CD38-negative IgG-negative class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype CD24-negative, CD38-negative, and IgG-negative.

term: B220-positive CD38-positive IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: A B220-positive CD38-positive IgG-negative memory B cell is a CD38-positive IgG-negative class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype B220-positive, CD38-positive, and IgG-negative.

term: B220-low CD38-positive IgG-negative class switched memory B cell
desc: A B220-low CD38-positive IgG-negative memory B cell is a CD38-positive IgG-negative class switched memory B cell that lacks IgG on the cell surface with the phenotype B220-low, CD38-positive, and IgG-positive.

term: CD27-positive gamma-delta T cell
desc: A circulating gamma-delta T cell that is CD27-positive and capable of producing IFN-gamma.

term: CD27-negative gamma-delta T cell
desc: A circulating gamma-delta T cell that expresses RORgamma(t), is CD27-negative and is capable of IL-17 secretion.

term: CD25-positive, CD27-positive immature gamma-delta T cell
desc: A CD25-positive, CD27-positive immature gamma-delta T cell found in the thymus that has an immature phenotype (i.e. CD24-high, CD25-high, CD62L-high, CD44-high, CD2-low, CD5-low).

term: innate effector T cell
desc: A T cell with a receptor of limited diversity that is capable of immediate effector functions upon stimulation.

term: Tc17 cell
desc: A CD8-positive, alpha-beta T cell that has the phenotype CXCR3-negative, CCR6-positive, CCR5-high, CD45RA-negative, and capable of producing IL-17 and some IFNg.

term: regular atrial cardiac myocyte
desc: Regular cardiac myocyte of a cardiac atrium.

term: regular interatrial cardiac myocyte
desc: A cardiac myocyte of the interatrial region of the heart.

term: regular ventricular cardiac myocyte
desc: Regular cardiac myocyte of a cardiac ventricle.

term: stromal cell of ovary
desc: A stomal cell of the ovary

term: stromal cell of ovarian cortex
desc: A stromal cell of the ovarian cortex.

term: stromal cell of ovarian medulla
desc: A stromal cell of the ovarian medulla.

term: nonkeratinized cell of epidermis
desc: Epidermal cells that do not contain keratin. Cell type is usually associated with moist epidermal tissues.

term: type II cell of adrenal cortex
desc: A cell in the zona fasciculata that produce glucocorticoids, e.g cortisol.

term: type III cell of adrenal cortex
desc: A cell in the zona reticularis that produce sex hormones.

term: endothelial cell of lymphatic vessel
desc: A endothelial cell of a lymphatic vessel. The border of the oak leaf-shaped endothelial cell of initial lymphatics are joined by specialized buttons. The discontinuous feature of buttons distinguishes them from zippers in collecting lymphatics, but both types of junctions are composed of proteins typical of adherens junctions and tight junctions found in the endothelium of blood vessels. Buttons seal the sides of flaps of the oak leaf-shaped endothelial cell, leaving open the tips of flaps as routes for fluid entry without disassembly and reformation of intercellular junctions.

term: endothelial cell of vascular tree
desc: An endothelial cell of the vascular tree, which includes blood vessels and lymphatic vessels.

term: acinar cell of sebaceous gland
desc: A sebum secreting cell of the skin that secretes sebum into the hair follicles.

term: active chief cell of parathyroid gland
desc: A parathyroid chief cell that is actively secreting hormone. Have large Golgi complexes with numerous vesicles and small membrane-bound granules; secretory granules are rare, cytoplasmic glycogen sparse, much of the cytoplasm being occupied by flat sacs of granular endoplasmic reticulum in parallel arrays; in normal humans, inactive chief cells outnumber active chief cells in a ratio of 3-5:1

term: dark cell of eccrine sweat gland
desc: A cell pyramidal in shape, with their broad ends facing and forming the greater extent of the lining of the main lumen. Secretes glycoproteins associated with mucus.

term: dark chief cell of parathyroid cell
desc: A chief cell that is smaller than light chief cells and has a smaller and darker nucleus and a finely granular cytoplasm with many granules.

term: capillary endothelial cell
desc: An endothelial cell found in capillaries.

term: ciliated columnar cell of tracheobronchial tree
desc: A ciliated columnar cell found in the trachea and bronchus. Vary from low to tall columnar; possesses up to 300 cilia at its surface, interspersed with long irregular microvilli with the cilia varying in length from about 6um in the trachea to about 4um in the terminal bronchioles; driving force of the ciliary current in the bronchial tree.

term: clear cell of eccrine sweat gland
desc: A sweat producing cell of eccrine sweat glands. Pyramidal in shape, with its base resting on the basal lamina or myoepitheliocytes, and its microvillus-covered apical plasma membrane line up the intercellular canaliculi. Cell is not stained by hematoxylin or eosin.

term: clear chief cell of parathyroid cell
desc: A chief cell of parathyroid glands that does not stain with hematoxylin or eosin. This cell is larger, has a larger nucleus and fewer secretory granules than dark chief cells.

term: dental pulp cell
desc: A cell found within the dental pulp.

term: epithelial cell of uterus
desc: An epithelial cell of the uterus.

term: epithelioid macrophage
desc: Epithelioid macrophage is an activated macrophage that resembles an epithelial cell with finely granular, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm and central, ovoid nucleus (oval or elongate). This cell type is able to merge into one another to form aggregates. The presence of such aggregates may characterize some pathologic conditions, mainly granulomatous inflammation.

term: late promyelocyte
desc: A promyelocyte that is considerably smaller, with more condensed chromatin, and nucleoli are no longer conspicuous.

term: columnar cell of endocervix
desc: A columnar cell of the cervix uteri.

term: corneocyte
desc: The dead keratin-filled squamous cell of the stratum corneum. This cell type lacks a nucleus.

term: early promyelocyte
desc: A promyelocyte with a nucleus that is indented and contains more marginated heterochromatin compared to its precursor cell (myeloblast); cytoplasm is deeply basophilic and contains numerous mitochondria and meandering cysternae of endoplasmic reticulum; largest of the granulocyte lineages.

term: echinocyte
desc: A crenated erythrocyte with 30+ crenations, bumps or spurs that are the result of damage due to age or disease.

term: endosteal cell
desc: A cell type that makes up the highly vascular membrane lining the marrow cavity of long bones.

term: external epithelial cell of tympanic membrane
desc: Epithelial cell found on the external side of the tympanic membrane

term: general ecto-epithelial cell
desc: Epithelial cells derived from general body ectoderm and ectoderm placodes.

term: basal external epithelial cell of tympanic membrane
desc: A cell type found in the basal epithelial layer on the external side of the tympanic membrane. Cell type is flattened with intracellular spaces of variable dimensions.

term: superficial external epithelial cell of tympanic membrane
desc: A cell type found on the superficial layer of the external side of the tympanic membrane. This cell-type lacks a nucleus.

term: internal epithelial cell of tympanic membrane
desc: An extremely flattened cell type found on the inner side of the tympanic membrane. The surface of this cell type carries sparse pleomorphic microvilli that are more common near the junctional zones.

term: internal pillar cell of cochlea
desc: A rod-shpaed cell that forms a single row adjacent to and supporting the inner hair cells.

term: external pillar cell of cochlea
desc: A rod-shaped cell found in 3 or 4 rows that lie adjacent to and support the outer hair cells.

term: phalangeal cell
desc: A supporting cell that is attached to the basement membrane and forms rows that support the hair cells.

term: epithelial cell of Malassez
desc: An epithelial cell that remains from the disintegration of the epithelial root sheath involved in the development of teeth.

term: olfactory epithelial cell
desc: A specialized cell involved in sensory perception of smell.

term: border cell of cochlea
desc: A border cell is a slender columnar cell on the medial portion of the basilar membrane.

term: basal cell of olfactory epithelium
desc: An epithelial cell located on the basal lamina of the olfactory epithelium.

term: keratinized cell of the oral mucosa
desc: A keratinized cell located in the hard palate or gingiva.

term: globose cell of olfactory epithelium
desc: A rounded or elliptical epithelial cell, with pale-staining open face nucleus and pale cytoplasm rich in free ribosomes and clusters of centrioles; form a distinct basal zone spaced slightly from the basal surface of the epithelium.

term: interdental cell of cochlea
desc: A long, spindle-shaped supporting cells arranged in parallel rows that secretes components of the tectorial membrane and potassium ions into the endolymph.

term: extraglomerular mesangial cell
desc: A cell that is a specialized type of pericyte providing structural support for the capillary loops of kidney. A flat, elongated cell with extensive fine cytoplasmic processes found outside the kidney glomerulus near the macula densa and bound laterally by afferent and efferent arterioles. Being phagocytic, this cell participates in the continuous turnover of the basal lamina by removing its outer portion containing residues of filtration, while the lamina is renewed on its inner surface by the endothelial cells.

term: follicular cell of ovary
desc: A cell within the follicle of an ovary.

term: primary follicular cell of ovary
desc: A cell within the primary follicle of the ovary.

term: secondary follicular cell of ovary
desc: A cell of a secondary follicile within the ovary.

term: folliculostellate cell of pars distalis of adenohypophysis
desc: A supporting cell of the anterior pituitary gland involved in trophic and catabolic processes; expresses a broad spectrum of cytokeratins indicative of their epithelial nature.

term: epithelial cell of stomach
desc: An epithelial cell found in the lining of the stomach.

term: foveolar cell of stomach
desc: An epithelial cell within one of the pits in the embryonic gastric mucosa from which the gastric glands develop .

term: mucous cell of stomach
desc: A mucous cell in the epithelium of the stomach.

term: mucus neck cell of gastric gland
desc: A neck cell that secretes mucus within the stomach. Its products are distinct histochemically from those of the surface mucous cells of stomach.

term: surface mucosal cell of stomach
desc: A simple columnar cell that populates the entire luminal surface including the gastric pits. This cell types secrete mucus to form a thick protective, lubricant layer over the gastric wall.

term: stem cell of gastric gland
desc: A stomach epithelial cell that is olumnar in form with a few short apical microvilli; relatively undifferentiated mitotic cell from which other types of gland are derived; few in number, situated in the isthmus region of the gland and base of the gastric pit.

term: basal proper cell of olfactory epithelium
desc: A flat or angular epithelial cell with condensed nuclei and darkly staining cytoplasm containing numerous intermediate filaments inserted into desmosomes contacting surrounding supporting cells; lie in contact with the basal lamina of olfactory epithelium.

term: basal cell of epidermis
desc: A basally situated, mitotically active, columnar-shaped keratinocyte attached to the basement membrane.

term: glomerular endothelial cell
desc: An endothelial cell found in the glomerulus of the kidney. This cell is flattened, highly fenestrated, and plays a vital role in the formation of glomerular ultrafiltrate.

term: granular cell of epidermis
desc: A keratinocyte of the epidermis that is characterized by containing granules of keratohyalin and lamellar granules.

term: squamous cell of epidermis
desc: A flat keratinocyte immediately below the cornified layer.

term: granulocytopoietic cell
desc: A cell involved in the formation of a granulocyte.

term: metamyelocyte
desc: A eosinophil precursor in the granulocytic series, being a cell intermediate in development between a myelocyte and a band form cell. The nucleus becomes indented where the indentation is smaller than half the distance to the farthest nuclear margin; chromatin becomes coarse and clumped; specific granules predominate while primary granules are rare.

term: myelocyte
desc: A cell type that is the first of the maturation stages of the granulocytic leukocytes normally found in the bone marrow. Granules are seen in the cytoplasm. The nuclear material of the myelocyte is denser than that of the myeloblast but lacks a definable membrane. The cell is flat and contains increasing numbers of granules as maturation progresses.

term: monopoietic cell
desc: A cell involved in the formation of a monocyte (monopoiesis).

term: hepatic stem cell
desc: A stem cell that can give rise to the cells of the liver.

term: hepatic oval stem cell
desc: A transient hepatic stem cell observed after liver injury with a high nuclear to cytoplasm ratio that can differentiate into mature hepatocytes and bile duct cells. Arises from more than one tissue.

term: inactive chief cell of parathyoid gland
desc: A parathyroid chief cell that is not actively secreting hormone. Contains small Golgi complexes with only a few grouped vesicles and membrane-bound secretory granules; glycogen and many lipofuscin granules abound but sacs of granular endoplasmic reticulum are rare and dispersed. In normal humans, inactive chief cells out number active chief cells in a ratio of 3-5:1.

term: oncocyte
desc: A large epithelial cell with an extremely acidophilic and granular cytoplasm, containing vast numbers of mitochondria; such cells may undergo neoplastic transformation. From the Greek word onkos meaning swelling, this cell type is found in parathyroid, salivary and thyroid glands.

term: oxyphil cell of parathyroid gland
desc: An oncocyte located in the parathyroid gland.

term: oxyphil cell of thyroid
desc: An oncocyte located in the thyroid.

term: renal beta-intercalated cell
desc: A renal intercalated cell that secretes base and reabsorbs acid in the coritcal collecting duct to mantain acid/base balance.

term: epithelial cell of tracheobronchial tree
desc: An epithelial cell of the tracheobronchial tree.

term: Brush cell of epithelium proper of large intestine
desc: Brush cell found in the epithelial layer of the colon.

term: brush cell
desc: A cell type found in the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts that is characterized by the presence of a tuft of blunt, squat microvilli (120-140 per cell). Function of this cell type is not known.

term: brush cell of lobular bronchiole
desc: A brush cell found in the epithelium of lobular bronchiole.

term: brush cell of terminal bronchiole
desc: A brush cell of the epithelium in the terminal bronchiole.

term: brush cell of trachea
desc: Brush cell of the epithelium in the trachea.

term: brush cell of bronchus
desc: A brush cell found in the epithelium of bronchus.

term: intermediate epitheliocyte
desc: An epithelial cell present in the trachea and bronchi; columnar in shape; generally lack cilia; immature forms of ciliated or secretory cells which have been formed from stem cells.

term: red muscle cell
desc: A slow muscle cell that contains high levels of myoglobin and oxygen storing proteins giving the cell a red appearance.

term: type I muscle cell
desc: A slow muscle cell that has large amounts of myoglobin, stores energy as triglycerides, generates ATP by the oxidative method and is resistant to fatigue.

term: type II muscle cell
desc: A fast muscle fiber cell that stores energy in the form of glycogen and creatine phosphate.

term: white muscle cell
desc: A muscle cell with low content of myoglobin and other oxygen storing proteins. This muscle cell has a white appearance.

term: type IIa muscle cell
desc: A type II muscle cell that contains large amounts of myoglobin, has many mitochondria and very many blood capillaries. Type II A cells are red, have a very high capacity for generating ATP by oxidative metabolic processes, split ATP at a very rapid rate, have a fast contraction velocity and are resistant to fatigue.

term: type IIb muscle cell
desc: A type II muscle cell that contains a low content of myoglobin, relatively few mitochondria, relatively few blood capillaries and large amounts of glycogen. Type II B fibres are white, geared to generate ATP by anaerobic metabolic processes, not able to supply skeletal muscle fibres continuously with sufficient ATP, fatigue easily, split ATP at a fast rate and have a fast contraction velocity.

term: intermediate muscle cell
desc: An intermediate muscle cell that has characteristics of both fast and slow muscle cells.

term: intermediate trophoblast cell
desc: A trophoblast that leaves the placenta and invades the endometrium and myometrium. This cell type is crucial in increasing blood flow to the fetus.

term: immature dendritic epithelial T cell precursor
desc: A double negative thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain that has as part a Vgamma3 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-positive. This cell-type is found in the fetal thymus with highest numbers occurring at E17-E18.

term: anchoring trophoblast
desc: A trophoblast found at the junction of the placenta. This cell type makes a unique fibronectin-trophouteronectin junction that helps mediate attachment of the placenta to the uterus. This cell type is also found junction of the chorion layer of the external membranes and the decidua.

term: interstitial cell of pineal gland
desc: A cell located between the pinealocytes.

term: keratinized squamous cell of esophagus
desc: A squamous cell that has keratin in the esophagus.

term: vertebrate lens cell
desc: A cell comprising the transparent, biconvex body separating the posterior chamber and vitreous body, and constituting part of the refracting mechanism of the mammalian eye.

term: anterior lens cell
desc: A cell of the transparent layer of simple cuboidal epithelium over the anterior surface of the lens; transform into lens fiber(s).

term: lens epithelial cell
desc: A cell of the cuboidal epithelium that covers the lens. The cells of the lens epithelium regulate most of the homeostatic functions of the lens. As ions, nutrients, and liquid enter the lens from the aqueous humor, Na+/K+ ATPase pumps in the lens epithelial cells pump ions out of the lens to maintain appropriate lens osmolarity and volume, with equatorially positioned lens epithelium cells contributing most to this current. The activity of the Na+/K+ ATPases keeps water and current flowing through the lens from the poles and exiting through the equatorial regions. The cells of the lens epithelium also serve as the progenitors for new lens fibers. It constantly lays down fibers in the embryo, fetus, infant, and adult, and continues to lay down fibers for lifelong growth.

term: secondary lens fiber
desc: A lens fiber cell that develops from primary lens fiber; located towards the center of lens; cell organelles are normally degraded or in the process of being degraded.

term: non-nucleated secondary lens fiber
desc: A secondary lens fiber cell that lacks a nucleus.

term: nucleated secondary lens fiber
desc: A secondary fiber cell that contains a nucleus.

term: primary lens fiber
desc: An elongating cell that rapidly obliterates the lumen of the lens vesicle. Subsequently, differentiation of this cell type at the lens equator leads to the formation of secondary fiber cells that come to overlie the primary fibers.

term: light chief cell of parathyroid gland
desc: A chief cell that is bigger than dark chief cells and has a larger and lighter nucleus and a cytoplasm with few granules.

term: epithelial cell of prostate
desc: An epithelial cell of the prostate.

term: epithelial cell of prostatic duct
desc: An epithelial cell of prostatic duct.

term: epithelial cell of prostatic acinus
desc: An epithelial cell of the prostatic acinus.

term: basal cell of prostatic acinus
desc: A cell of the basal layer of the epithelium in the prostatic acinus.

term: luminal cell of prostatic acinus
desc: A cell of the luminal layer of the epithelium in the prostatic acinus.

term: basal epithelial cell of prostatic duct
desc: A cell that constitutes the basal layer of epithelium in the prostatic duct.

term: luminal epithelial cell of prostatic duct
desc: A cell that constitutes the luminal layer of epithelium of prostatic duct.

term: male gonocyte
desc: A primordial germ cell that is destined to become a male germ cell.

term: ooblast
desc: A primordial cell from which an oocyte (ovum) ultimately is developed.

term: marrow fibroblast
desc: A fibroblast in the bone marrow.

term: pulmonary interstitial fibroblast
desc: A fibroblasts found in interstitial spaces in the pulmonary tract. Greater numbers of these cells are found in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

term: nucleate cell
desc: A cell containing at least one nucleus.

term: smooth muscle cell of sphincter of pupil
desc: A circular smooth muscle cell of the iris, innervated by the ciliary nerves (parasympathetic), and acting to contract the pupil. This muscle cell derives from neuroectoderm. This smooth muscle cell results from transformation of epithelial cells to smooth muscle cells.

term: squamous cell of ectocervix
desc: A nonstratified squamous cell located in the ectocervix.

term: obsolete null lymphocyte
desc: OBSOLETE: A lymphocyte that lacks T or B cell surface markers.

term: peripheral blood stem cell
desc: A hematopoeitic stem cell found in the blood. Normally found in very limited numbers in the peripheral circulation (less than 0.1% of all nucleated cells).

term: pleural macrophage
desc: A tissue macrophage that is in the pleural space.

term: pluripotent stem cell
desc: A pluripotent stem cell has the ability to form cells from all three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm). However, unlike totipotent stem cells, they cell can not generate all the cells of the whole organism such as placenta.

term: primitive cardiac myocyte
desc: A stem cell that can differentiate into a cardiac myocyte.

term: intestinal crypt stem cell
desc: A cell that is found in a zone occupying the bottom region of the crypt; provide the source of most of the cell types of the intestinal epithelium; proliferate by mitotic division; differentiates into columnar or goblet cells.

term: epithelial cell of alimentary canal
desc: An epithelial cell of the musculomembranous digestive tube extending from the mouth to the anus.

term: epithelial cell of esophagus
desc: An epithelial cell of the esophagus.

term: epithelial cell of large intestine
desc: An epithelial cell of the large intestine.

term: epithelial cell of small intestine
desc: An epithelial cell of the small intestine.

term: stromal cell of endometrium
desc: An epithelial cell that regulates growth and differentiation of the overlying epithelium.

term: supporting cell of carotid body
desc: A supportive cell that has characteristics of glial cell. Processes of this cell envelope the junctions between glomus cells and nerve endings.

term: epithelial cell of thyroid gland
desc: An epithelial cell of thyroid gland.

term: thyroid follicular cell
desc: A cell type that varies from squamous to columnar, depending on their activity with microvillus directed luminally. This cell produces and secretes thyroid hormones.

term: neuroepithelial stem cell
desc: The stem cell from which glial precursor cell arises from.

term: epithelial cell of parathyroid gland
desc: An epithelial cell of the parathyroid gland.

term: endothelial cell of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An endothelial cell found in the mucosa associated with the facial skeleton.

term: endothelial cell of sinusoid
desc: An endothelial cell that lines any of the venous cavities through which blood passes in various glands and organs such as the spleen and liver.

term: transitional cell of parathyroid gland
desc: One of three types of epithelial cells that populate the parathyroid gland; cytological characteristics intermediate between those of the chief cell and of the oxyphil cell. Because only one hormone is produced, the three cell forms are widely believed to be different phases in the life cycle of a single cell type, with the chief cell being its physiologically active stage.

term: type A cell of stomach
desc: A type of enteroendocrine cell found in the stomach that secretes glucagon.

term: type D cell of colon
desc: A D cell located in the colon.

term: type D cell of small intestine
desc: A type D cell of the small intestine.

term: type D cell of stomach
desc: A type D cell found in the stomach.

term: P/D1 enteroendocrine cell
desc: An enteroendocrine cell that stores and secretes Ghrelin.

term: vasoactive intestinal peptide secreting cell
desc: An endocrine cell that secretes vasoactive intestinal peptide.

term: type EC2 enteroendocrine cell
desc: A type EC enteroendocrine cell in the duodenum and jejunum that stores and secretes motilin and 5-hydroxytryptamine.

term: type EC1 enteroendocrine cell
desc: A type EC enteredocrine cell in the intestines that stores and secretes substance P and 5-hydroxytryptamine.

term: motilin secreting cell
desc: A cell that secretes motilin, a gastric hormone that at low pH inhibits gastric motor activity, whereas at high pH has a stimulating effect.

term: type ECL enteroendocrine cell
desc: A type EC enteroendocrine cell type that is numerous in the fundus of the stomach; stores 5-hydroxytryptamine and histamine.

term: histamine secreting cell
desc: A cell type that secretes histamine.

term: pancreatic PP cell
desc: A PP cell located in the islets of the pancreas.

term: obsolete PP cell of pancreatic acinus
desc: OBSOLETE: A PP cell located in the pancreatic acinus. Obsoleted due to a lack of published evidence that this cell type is actually found in the pancreatic acinus.

term: type I enteroendocrine cell
desc: An enteroendocrine cell commonest in the duodenum and jejunum, rare in ileum, that secretes cholecystokinin. This cell type is involved in the regulation of digestive enzymes and bile.

term: GIP cell
desc: An enteroendocrine cell of duodenum and jejunum that produces gastric inhibitory peptide.

term: type L enteroendocrine cell
desc: A enteroendocrine cell type that is numerous in ileum, present in jejunum and large intestine, few in duodenum. This cell type produces glucagon-like immunoreactants (glicentin, glucagon-37, glucagon-29, GLP-1 and -2) and PYY.

term: type N enteroendocrine cell
desc: An enteroendorcine cell found in the ileum and jejunum that produces neurotensin.

term: type S enteroendocrine cell
desc: Scattered in duodenojejunal mucosa, this enteroendocrine cell secretes secretin and serotonin.

term: type TG enteroendocrine cell
desc: An enteroendocrine cell which produces a gastrin- and cholecystokinin-like peptide. The apical microvilli-rich plasma membrane is in open contact with the small intestine mucosa. This cell type is devoid of gastrin-17 but contains other fragments of the gastrin polypeptide.

term: ecto-epithelial cell of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An epithelial cell of the mucosa associated with facial skeleton.

term: type X enteroendocrine cell
desc: An enteroendorcine cell found in the fundus and pylorus, this cell type has dense round secretory granules that contain ghrelin.

term: type III taste bud cell
desc: A taste receptor cell that is characterized by morphologically identifiable synaptic contacts with the gustatory nerve fibers and expression of the synaptic membrane protein-25 (SNAP-25) and NCAM.

term: type II taste cell
desc: A taste receptor cell that has a short microvilli, a projecting apical region, a large rounded nucleus, and expresses taste chemoreceptors thus making them the transducing cell for taste qualities.

term: type IV taste receptor cell
desc: A rounded, mitotically active stem cell which is the source of new cells of the taste bud; located basally.

term: type V taste receptor cell
desc: A cell type that forms the boundary with the surrounding epithelium.

term: type I taste bud cell
desc: A densely staining taste receptor cell that contains many dense vacuoles in their apical regions which project into the apical space and bear microvilli. This cell type serves as a supporting cell by surrounding and isolating the other cell types from each other; secrete a dense amorphous material that surrounds the microvilli in the taste pore. This cell type expresses a glial glutumate transporter, GLAST.

term: Y chromosome-bearing sperm cell
desc: A sperm bearing a Y chromosome. Chromosomal and genetic sex is established at fertilization in mammals and depends upon whether an X-bearing sperm or a Y-bearing sperm fertilizes the X-bearing ovum.

term: X chromosome-bearing sperm cell
desc: A sperm bearing an X chromosome. Chromosomal and genetic sex is established at fertilization in mammals and depends upon whether an X-bearing sperm or a Y-bearing sperm fertilizes the X-bearing ovum.

term: type I cell of carotid body
desc: A round or oval neuroepithelial cell that contacts other type I cells or capillaries. They occur in clusters that are surrounded by sheath cells (type-II cells) in the carotid body. This cell type is capable of secreting a number of neurotransmitters.

term: epithelial cell of thymus
desc: An epithelial cell of the thymus. Epithelial reticular cells are pleomorphic, stellate, non-phagocytic cells which seem to be supportive in function and are held together by desmosomes. They replace the fibroblastoid reticular cells found in other lymphoid organs. Other epithelial cells in the medulla have the ultrastructure of secretory cells. Although different epithelial cells throughout the thymus appear alike by light microscopy their ultrastructure and function varies.

term: type-1 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: An epithelial cell with a well defined Golgi apparatus that makes up the continuous layer of cells bordering the thymic tissue beneath the capsule.

term: type-6 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: A thymic epithelial cell that has an eccentric, round, or irregularly shaped hetero or euchromatic nucleus. The hallmark of this cell type is the presence of vacuoles, which are clustered in one area of the cytoplasm in the vicinity of the nucleus. The vacuoles are small and acquire a grape-like form, occasionally showing delicate internal microvillous projections.

term: type-4 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: An epithelial cell with high nuclear and cytoplasmic electron-density. This cell type is found in the deeper portions of the cortex but is more abundant in the medulla of the thymus.

term: type-3 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: A thymic epithelial cell with moderate nuclear and cytoplasmic electron-density. Scattered in the cortex, this cell type is predominant in the mid and deep cortex.

term: type-5 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: A thymic epithelial cell type with low nuclear and cytoplasmic electrondensity; has a round, euchromatic nucleus and occurs in small groups at the corticomedullary junction or scattered singly in the medulla.

term: type-2 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: An epithelial cell scattered in the cortex, predominant in the outer cortex with a large pale nucleus and a prominent nucleolus.

term: type-7 epithelial cell of thymus
desc: A small medullary thymic epithelial cell with a spindle shape, often arranged in groups and connected to each other by large desmosomes and interdigitations. The cytoplasm is sparse, with scanty organelles and thick bundles of cytokeratin.

term: type B synovial cell
desc: A synovial cell type that resembles fibroblasts, has abundant granular endoplasmic reticulum but contains fewer vacuoles and vesicles. This cell type secretes glycoproteins and hyaluronic acid.

term: type A synovial cell
desc: A synovial cell that is macrophage-like, characterized by surface ruffles or lamellipodia, plasma membrane invaginations and associated micropinocytotic vesicles, Golgi apparatus and little granular endoplasmic reticulum.

term: pigmented ciliary epithelial cell
desc: A ciliated epithelial cell of the retina, this cell type uptakes sodium chloride and passes it to non-pigmented ciliary epithelial cells.

term: non-pigmented ciliary epithelial cell
desc: A multi-ciliated cell of the retina that lacks visual pigment and contributes to aqueous humor by secreting chloride ions. This cell type maintains gap junctions with pigmented epithelial cells.

term: epithelial cell of distal tubule
desc: An epithelial cell of the distal convoluted tubule of the kidney that helps regulate systemic levels of potassium, sodium, calcium, and pH.

term: epithelial cell of proximal tubule
desc: An epithelial cell of the proximal tubule of the kidney.

term: brush border cell of the proximal tubule
desc: A brush border epithelial cell located in the proximal tubule of the kidney that detects fluid flow.

term: epithelial cell of skin gland
desc: An epithelial cell of a skin gland.

term: corticotroph
desc: A basophil chromphil cell of the anterior pitiutary gland that produce adrenocorticotropic hormone, melanocyte-stimulating hormone and lipotropin. This cell type is irregular in shape and has short dendritic processes which are inserted among other neighboring cells;

term: mammosomatotroph
desc: An acidophil cell of the anterior pitiuatry gland that produces both prolactin and growth hormone.

term: mammotroph
desc: An acidophilic cell of the anterior pituitary that produces prolactin.

term: somatotroph
desc: An acidophilic cell of the anterior pituitary that produces growth hormone, somatotropin.

term: endocrine-paracrine cell of prostate gland
desc: An ecto-epithelial cell of the prostate gland that secretes hormones.

term: external supporting cell of vestibular epithelium
desc: An auditory epithelial support cell located in the vestibular epithelium that has many hallmarks of glial cells. This cell type express glial markers such as vimentin, S100, glutamate-aspartate transporter, low affinity neurotrophin receptor p75, glial fibrillary acidic protein, and proteolipid protein.

term: supporting cell of cochlea
desc: An epithelial supporting cell located in the cochlea.

term: supporting cell of vestibular epithelium
desc: A supporting cell of the vestibular epithelium.

term: external limiting cell of vestibular epithelium
desc: An external limiting cell found in the vestibular epithelium.

term: periperhal blood mesothelial cell
desc: A mesothelial cell capable of circulating in the blood by first losing its squamous character. This cell can incorporate into the regenerating mesothelium.

term: neural cell
desc: A cell that is part of the nervous system.

term: connective tissue cell
desc: A cell of the supporting or framework tissue of the body, arising chiefly from the embryonic mesoderm and including adipose tissue, cartilage, and bone.

term: embryonic cell
desc: A cell of the embryo.

term: embryonic stem cell
desc: A stem cell of embryonic origin.

term: amniocyte
desc: A cell of afetus which is suspended in the amniotic fluid. Amniocytes are considered to arise from several tissues including fetal skin, the fetal urinary tract, umbilical cord, and the inner amniotic surface.

term: myoepithelial cell of mammary gland
desc: A myoepithelial cell that surrounds milk-secreting luminal epithelial cells. This cell type contracts under the stimulation of oxytocin and is attached to the basement membrane by hemidesmosomes and to the adjacent luminal cells by desmosomes. This cell type expresses high level of keratin-14 and is estrogen receptor alpha negative.

term: mammary alveolar cell
desc: The milk-producing cell of the alveolar unit that emerges during pregnancy.

term: luminal epithelial cell of mammary gland
desc: A mammary epithelial cell that occurs in the lumen of the ductal and alveoli structure in the breast.

term: mammary gland epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the mammary gland.

term: bronchial epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the bronchus.

term: basal epithelial cell of tracheobronchial tree
desc: An epithelial cell type that lacks the columnar shape typical for other respiratory epithelial cells. This cell type is able to differentiate into other respiratory epithelial cells in response to injury.

term: undifferentiated cell of bronchus epithelium
desc: An undifferentiated columnar cell of the bronchus epithelium

term: ciliated cell of the bronchus
desc: A ciliated cell of the bronchus.

term: neural crest derived fat cell
desc: A fat cell derived from a neural crest cell.

term: preadipocyte
desc: An undifferentiated fibroblast that can be stimulated to form a fat cell.

term: brown preadipocyte
desc: A preadipocyte that is capable of differentiating into a brown adipocyte. This cell type expresses uncoupling protein-1, PPAR-gamma, PR-domain-containing 16; and PGC-1alpha (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) coactivator-1alpha).

term: buccal mucosa cell
desc: An endothelial cell that lines the oral cavitiy including the mucosa of the gums, the palate, the lip, and the cheek.

term: keratinocyte stem cell
desc: A stem cell located in the bulge of the hair follicle that can give rise to regenerate the new follicle with each hair cycle and to reepithelialize the epidermis during wound repair.

term: CD56-positive, CD161-positive immature natural killer cell
desc: A natural killer cell that is developmentally immature, has the phenotype CD34-negative, CD56-negative, CD117-positive, CD122-positive,and CD161-positive.

term: prostate stem cell
desc: A prostate epithelial cell that is CD133-positive, CD44-positive, integrin A2beta3-high. This cell is a stem cell for the prostate epithelium.

term: luminal cell of prostate epithelium
desc: The exocrine cell of the prostate, this epithelial cell secretes prostatic acid phosphotase and PSA, and is dependent on androgen hormones for survival.

term: basal cell of prostate epithelium
desc: An undifferentiated cell of the prostate epithelium that lacks secretory activity.

term: circulating endothelial cell
desc: A circulating endothelial cell of the phenotype CD146-positive, CD105-positive, CD45-negative. This cell type is indicative of recent vascular damage.

term: decidual natural killer cell
desc: A natural killer cell subset that is found in the decidual of the uterus and is CD56-high, Galectin-1-positive and CD16-negative. This cell type represents the most abundant immune cell type in the decidual during the first trimester of pregnancy.

term: CD56-negative, CD161-positive immature natural killer cell
desc: A natural killer cell that is developmentally immature, has the phenotype CD34-negative, CD56-negative, CD117-positive, CD122-positive,and CD161-positive.

term: CD27-low, CD11b-low immature natural killer cell
desc: An immature natural killer cell that is NK1.1-positive, DX5-positive, Ly49-positive, CD27-low and CD11b-low. This cell type is found in high numbers in the liver.

term: Dx5-negative, NK1.1-positive immature natural killer cell
desc: An immature natural killer cell that is NK1.1-positive and DX-5 negative.

term: CD27-high, CD11b-high natural killer cell
desc: A mature natural killer cell that is CD27-high and CD11b-high. This cell type is capable of interferon-gamma secretion.

term: CD27-low, CD11b-high natural killer cell
desc: A CD27-low, CD11b-high natural killer cell that has a higher threshold of activation due to higher expression of inhibitory receptors.

term: CD27-high, CD11b-low natural killer cell
desc: A natural killer cell that is CD27-high and CD11b-low.

term: endocardial cell
desc: An endothelial cell that lines the intracavitary lumen of the heart, separating the circulating blood from the underlying myocardium. This cell type releases a number of vasoactive substances including prostacyclin, nitrous oxide and endothelin.

term: progenitor cell of endocrine pancreas
desc: A multi-fate stem cell that is able to differentiate into the pancreas alpha, beta and delta endocrine cells. This cell type expresses neurogenin-3 and Isl-1.

term: gestational hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell that exists during embryogenesis.

term: fetal liver hematopoietic progenitor cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell that resides in the fetal liver. In mice, this cell type is first observed at E10.5. This cell type is MHC-positive, HSA-positive, AA4.1-positive, CD45-positive, Sca-1 positive, CD150-positive, CD48-negative and CD244-negative.

term: yolk sac hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem found in the yolk sac. In mice, this cell type is Sca-1-negative, CD45-negative, MHC-negative, HSA-positive, AA4.1-positive, CD44-positive.

term: primitive red blood cell
desc: A large nucleated basophilic erythrocyte found in mammalian embryos. This cell type arises from the blood islands of yolk sacs and expresses different types of hemoglobins (beta-H1, gamma-1 and zeta) than adult erythrocytes. Considered a type of erythroblast as this cell type can enucleate in circulation.

term: primitive reticulocyte
desc: A primitive erythrocyte that has undergone enucleation. This cell type is 3-6 fold bigger than the fetal derived erythrocytes that they co-circulate with during fetal development. Expresses epsilon-gamma hemoglobin chains.

term: fetal derived definitive erythrocyte
desc: A fetal liver derived enucleated erythrocyte. This erythrocyte resembles adult erythrocytes in that they are small (3- to 6- times smaller than primitive erythrocytes) and produce adult hemaglobins.

term: pyrenocyte
desc: Derived from the Greek word pyren (the pit of a stone fruit), this is a transient nucleated cell type that results from exclusion of the nucleus from the primitive erythrocyte.

term: placental hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell of the placenta. This cell type is first observed E10.5 This cell type may give rise to fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells.

term: AGM hematopoietic stem cell
desc: A hematopoietic stem cell from the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region of the developing embryo. First seen at E10.5 in mouse embryos. May give rise to fetal liver HSC.

term: primitive erythroid progenitor
desc: A progenitor cell that is capable of forming colonies of primitive erythrocytes in the blood island of the yolk sac. First arrive at E7.5 in mouse and expresses CD41.

term: granule cell precursor
desc: A cell located in the outermost proliferative zone of the external germinal layer that can differentiate into astroglial cells and granule cells. This cell type is glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive and NK1-positive.

term: keratocyte
desc: A keratocyte is a specialized fibroblastresiding in the cornea stroma that has a flattened, dendritic cell located between the lamellae with a large flattened nucleus and lengthy processes which communicate with neighboring cells. Thiscorneallayer, representing about 85-90% of corneal thickness, is built up from highly regular collagenous lamellae and extracellular matrix components. Keratocytes play the major role in keeping it transparent, healing its wounds, and synthesizing its components. This cell type secretes collagen I, V, VI, and keratin sulfate.

term: cortical thymic epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the cortical portion of the thymus. Epithelial cells in this region are required for positive selection of CD8-positive T cells.

term: medullary thymic epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the medullary thymus. This cell type expresses a diverse range of tissue-specific antigens. This promiscuous gene expression is a cell-autonomous property of medullary epithelial cells and is maintained during the entire period of thymic T cell output.

term: myometrial cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the myometrium that enlarges and stretches during pregnancy, and contracts in response to oxytocin.

term: trabecular meshwork cell
desc: A cell that lines the trabecular meshwork, which is an area of tissue in the eye located around the base of the cornea, near the ciliary body, and is responsible for draining the aqueous humor from the eye via the anterior chamber (the chamber on the front of the eye covered by the cornea). This cell may play a role in regulating intraocular pressure.

term: respiratory epithelial cell
desc: An endo-epithelial cell of the respiratory tract.

term: fungal spore
desc: A differentiated form of a fungus produced during or as a result of an asexual or sexual reproductive process; usually a cell with a thick cell wall that stores and protects one or more nuclei. Spores may be produced in response to, and are characteristically resistant to, adverse environmental conditions.

term: respiratory goblet cell
desc: A simple columnar epithelial cell that secretes mucin. Rough endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, the nucleus, and other organelles are concentrated in the basal portion. The apical plasma membrane projects microvilli to increase surface area for secretion.

term: somatic cell
desc: A cell of an organism that does not pass on its genetic material to the organism's offspring (i.e. a non-germ line cell).

term: myotube
desc: A transversely striated, synctial muscle cell, formed by the fusion of myoblasts.

term: growth hormone releasing hormone secreting cell
desc: A peptide hormone secreting cell that secretes growth hormone releasing hormone.

term: ear hair cell
desc: A hair cell of the ear that contains the organs of balance and hearing.

term: Schwann cell precursor
desc: A giioblast cell that develops from a migratory neural crest cell. The SCP is embedded among neurons (axons) with minimal extracellular spaces separating them from nerve cell membranes and has no basal lamina. In rodents SCPs are the only cells in the Schwann cell linage that expresses Cdh19.

term: non-myelinating Schwann cell
desc: A glial cell that ensheaths multiple small diameter axons in the peripheral nervous system. The non-myelinating Schwann cell is embedded among neurons (axons) with minimal extracellular spaces separating them from nerve cell membranes and has a basal lamina. Cells can survive without an axon present. These cells can de-differentiate into immature Schwann cells.

term: immature Schwann cell
desc: A glial cell that develops from a Schwann cell precursor. The immature Schwann cell is embedded among neurons (axons) with minimal extracellular spaces separating them from nerve cell membranes and has a basal lamina. Cells can survive without an axon present. Immature Schwann cell can be found communally ensheathing large groups of axons.

term: immature Vgamma2-positive fetal thymocyte
desc: A double negative thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain containing a Vgamma2 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-positive and is found in the fetal thymus.

term: meningothelial cell
desc: A neurecto-epithelial cell found in the arachnoid villi of dura mater. This cell type facilitates flow of cerebrospinal fluid into the blood.

term: oospore
desc: An asexual spore formed by Oomycetes; formed upon fertilization of an oosphere.

term: uninucleate conidium
desc: A conidium that has only one nucleus.

term: multinucleate conidium
desc: A conidium that has more than one nucleus.

term: conidium of conidiophore head
desc: A uninucleate spore formed on specialized cells or projections, sterigma, of a conidiophore head.

term: uninucleate macroconidium
desc: A macroconidium that has only one nucleus.

term: blastoconidium
desc: An oblong or round asexual spore formed from conidial chains.

term: multinucleate macroconidium
desc: A macroconidium that has more than one nucleus.

term: arthroconidium
desc: Cylindrical spore formed by development and compartmentation of hyphae; the hyphae are often supporting blastoconidiophores.

term: multinucleate arthroconidium
desc: An arthroconidium that has more than one nucleus.

term: uninucleate arthroconidium
desc: An arthroconidium that has only one nucleus.

term: uninucleate blastconidium
desc: A blastoconidium that has only one nucleus.

term: multinucleate blastoconidium
desc: A blastoconidium that has more than one nucleus.

term: obsolete plant spore
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0025017 from Plant Ontology instead. A plant cell that arises through meiosis and develops into a gametophyte.

term: intermediate monocyte
desc: A monocyte that has characteristics of both patrolling and inflammatory monocytes.

term: CD141-positive myeloid dendritic cell
desc: A myeloid dendritic cell found in the blood, lymph nodes, tonsil, bone marrow, and spleen that is CD141-positive (BDCA-3), XCR1-positive, and Clec9A-positive. This cell-type can cross-present antigen to CD8-positive T cells and can produce inteferon-beta.

term: Gr1-high classical monocyte
desc: A resident monocyte that is Gr-1 high, CD43-negative, CX3CR1-negative, CD115-positive, and B220-negative.

term: CD14-low, CD16-positive monocyte
desc: A patrolling monocyte that is CD14-low and CD16-positive.

term: CD14-positive, CD16-positive monocyte
desc: A CD14-positive monocyte that is also CD16-positive and CCR2-negative.

term: Gr1-positive, CD43-positive monocyte
desc: An intermediate monocyte that is Gr1-positive, CD43-positive.

term: CD1c-positive myeloid dendritic cell
desc: A myeloid dendritic cell found in the blood that is CD1c-positive.

term: Fraction B/C precursor B cell
desc: A precursor B cell that is AA4-positive, IgM-negative, CD19-positive, CD43-positive and HSA-positive.

term: mature dendritic epithelial T cell precursor
desc: A thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain that has as part a Vgamma3 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-negative. This cell-type is found in the fetal thymus with highest numbers occurring at E17-E18.

term: Peyer's patch B cell
desc: A resting mature B cell within the Peyer's patch that is CD19-positive, B220-positive, IgM-positive, AA4-negative, CD23-positive, CD43-negative, and CD5-negative.

term: mature Vgamma2-positive fetal thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain containing Vgamma2 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-negative. This cell-type is found in the fetal thymus.

term: fetal thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte found in the fetal thymus.

term: gamma-delta thymocyte
desc: A post-natal thymocyte expressing components of the gamma-delta T cell receptor. This cell type is always double-negative (i.e. CD4-negative, CD8-negative).

term: immature Vgamma2-positive thymocyte
desc: A double negative post-natal thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain containing a Vgamma2 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-positive.

term: mature Vgamma2-positive thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain containing Vgamma2 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-negative. This cell-type is found in the fetal thymus.

term: immature Vgamma2-negative thymocyte
desc: A double negative post-natal thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain containing a Vgamma2 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-positive.

term: mature Vgamma2-negative thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that has a T cell receptor consisting of a gamma chain containing Vgamma2 segment, and a delta chain. This cell type is CD4- negative, CD8-negative and CD24-negative. This cell-type is found in the fetal thymus.

term: pancreatic stellate cell
desc: A cell that is found in the periacinar space of the exocrine pancreas and in perivascular and periductal regions of the pancreas, and has long cytoplasmic processes that encircle the base of the acinus. Expresses several intermediate filament proteins including vimentin and nestin. Shares many of the characteristics of hepatatic stellate cells, but not stellate cells of the central nervous system. Upon activation, this cell type undergoes morphological and gene expression changes that make the cell suggestive of being a type of myofibroblast.

term: Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-negative thymocyte
desc: A gamma-delta receptor that expresses Vgamma1.1 but does not express Vdelta6.3 chains in the T-cell receptor.

term: Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-positive thymocyte
desc: A gamma-delta receptor that expresses Vgamma1.1-Vdelta6.3 chains in the T-cell receptor.

term: mature Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-negative thymocyte
desc: A Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-negative thymocyte that is CD24-negative.

term: immature Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-negative thymocyte
desc: A Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-negative thymocyte that is CD24-positive.

term: immature Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-positive thymocyte
desc: A Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-positive thymocyte that is CD24-positive.

term: mature Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-positive thymocyte
desc: A Vgamma1.1-positive, Vdelta6.3-positive thymocyte that is CD24-negative.

term: primitive erythroid lineage cell
desc: An immature or mature cell of the first erythroid lineage to arise during embryonic development.

term: hemangioblast
desc: A pluripotent cell in the yolk sac that can give rise to mesenchymal cells including erythrocytes and endothelial cells.

term: mature T cell
desc: A T cell that expresses a T cell receptor complex and has completed T cell selection.

term: immature T cell
desc: A T cell that has not completed T cell selection.

term: nucleated reticulocyte
desc: A reticulocyte that retains the nucleus and other organelles. Found in birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.

term: enucleated reticulocyte
desc: A reticulocyte lacking a nucleus and showing a basophilic reticulum under vital staining due to the presence of ribosomes.

term: DN2a thymocyte
desc: A DN2 thymocyte that is Kit-hi.

term: DN2b thymocyte
desc: A DN2 thymocyte that is Kit-low.

term: early T lineage precursor
desc: A pro-T cell that is lin-negative, CD25-negative, CD127-negative, CD44-positive and kit-positive.

term: CD11b-positive, CD27-positive natural killer cell
desc: A mature natural killer cell that is CD11b-positive and CD27-positive.

term: resting double-positive thymocyte
desc: A double-positive, alpha-beta thymocyte that is small and not proliferating.

term: double-positive blast
desc: A double-positive thymocyte that is large (i.e. has a high forward scatter signal in flow cytometry) and is actively proliferating.

term: CD69-positive double-positive thymocyte
desc: A double-positive thymocyte that is CD69-positive and has begun positive selection.

term: CD4-intermediate, CD8-positive double-positive thymocyte
desc: A double-positive thymocyte that is undergoing positive selection, has high expression of the alpha-beta T cell receptor, is CD69-positive, and is in the process of down regulating the CD4 co-receptor.

term: CD4-positive, CD8-intermediate double-positive thymocyte
desc: A double-positive thymocyte that is undergoing positive selection, has high expression of the alpha-beta T cell receptor, is CD69-positive, and is in the process of down regulating the CD4 co-receptor.

term: CD24-positive, CD4 single-positive thymocyte
desc: A CD4-positive, CD8-negative thymocyte that is CD24-positive and expresses high levels of the alpha-beta T cell receptor.

term: CD69-positive, CD4-positive single-positive thymocyte
desc: A CD4-positive, CD8-negative thymocyte that expresses high levels of the alpha-beta T cell receptor and is CD69-positive.

term: CD24-positive, CD8 single-positive thymocyte
desc: A CD8-positive, CD4-negative thymocyte that is CD24-positive and expresses high levels of the alpha-beta T cell receptor.

term: CD69-positive, CD8-positive single-positive thymocyte
desc: A CD4-positive, CD8-negative thymocyte that expresses high levels of the alpha-beta T cell receptor and is CD69-positive.

term: mature CD4 single-positive thymocyte
desc: A mature CD4-positive, CD8-negative alpha-beta T cell found in the thymus that is CD24-low and has high expression of the T cell receptor.

term: mature CD8 single-positive thymocyte
desc: A mature CD8-positive, CD4-negative alpha-beta T cell found in the thymus that is CD24-low and has high expression of the T cell receptor.

term: NK1.1-positive natural killer cell
desc: A mature NK cell that is NK1.1-positive.

term: NKGA2-positive natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is NKGA2-positive.

term: Ly49D-positive natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is Ly49D-positive.

term: CD94-positive natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is CD94-positive.

term: CD94-negative, Ly49CI-negative natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is CD94-negative and Ly49Cl-negative.

term: Ly49CI-positive natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is Ly49Cl-positive.

term: Ly49H-positive natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is Ly49H-positive.

term: Ly49D-negative natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is Ly49D-negative.

term: Ly49CI-negative natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is Ly49Cl-negative.

term: CD94-negative natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is CD94-negative.

term: Ly49H-negative natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is Ly49H-negative.

term: CD94-positive Ly49CI-positive natural killer cell
desc: A NK1.1-positive T cell that is CD94-positive and Ly49Cl-positive.

term: tether cell
desc: A specialized hair cell that has an elongated kinocilium upon which an otolith accretes. The tether cell then anchors the otolith in place.

term: mammary stem cell
desc: A multi-fate stem cell that is the source of cells for growth of the mammary gland during puberty and gestation. This cell type gives rise to both the luminal and myoepithelial cell types of the gland, and have been shown to have the ability to regenerate the entire organ in mice. This cell type also plays an important role in carcinogenesis of the breast. This cell type is Lin-, CD24-positive, CD29-hi.

term: oligodendrocyte precursor cell
desc: The cell type from which oligodendrocytes develop. This cell originates from multiple structures within the developing brain including the medial ganglion eminence and the lateral ganglionic eminence. These cells migrate throughout the central nervous system and persist into adulthood where they play an important role in remyelination of injured neurons.

term: Cd4-negative, CD8_alpha-negative, CD11b-positive dendritic cell
desc: Cd4-negative, CD8_alpha-negative, CD11b-positive dendritic cell is a conventional dendritic cell that is CD11b-positive, CD4-negative, CD8_alpha-negative and is CD205-positive.

term: CD8_alpha-negative plasmactyoid dendritic cell
desc: A CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell that is CD8alpha-negative and CD4-positive.

term: CD8_alpha-positive plasmactyoid dendritic cell
desc: A CD11c-low plasmacytoid dendritic cell that is CD8alpha-positive and CD4-positive.

term: epidermal Langerhans cell
desc: A Langerhans cell that is in the epidermis and is CD45-positive, MHCII-positive, and CD11b-positive.

term: langerin-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: A dermal dendritic cell that is langerin-positive, CD103-positive, and CD11b-negative.

term: langerin-negative dermal dendritic cell
desc: A dermal dendritic cell that is langerin-negative, CD103-negative, and CD11b-positive.

term: CD8alpha-negative thymic conventional dendritic cell
desc: A conventional thymic dendritic cell that is CD8alpha-negative.

term: CD103-positive dendritic cell
desc: A conventional dendritic cell that is CD103-positive. This cell type is usually found in non-lymphoid tissue.

term: adipose dendritic cell
desc: A F4/80-negative dendritic cell located in adipose tissue.

term: SIRPa-positive adipose dendritic cell
desc: An adipose dendritic cell that is SIRPa-positive.

term: SIRPa-negative adipose dendritic cell
desc: An adipose dendritic cell that is SIRPa-negative.

term: CD11b-positive dendritic cell
desc: A conventional dendritic cell that expresses CD11b (ITGAM).

term: small intestine serosal dendritic cell
desc: A CD11b-positive dendritic cell located in the serosal portion of the small intestine epithelium. This cell type is CD45-positive, MHC-II-positive, CD11c-low, CD103-negative.

term: Gr1-high myeloid suppressor cell
desc: A myeloid suppressor cell that is Gr1-high and CD11c-negative.

term: Gr1-low myeloid suppressor cell
desc: A myeloid suppressor cell that is Gr1-low and CD11c-positive.

term: MHC-II-negative classical monocyte
desc: Gr1-high monocyte that lacks MHC-II receptor complex.

term: MHC-II-positive classical monocyte
desc: Gr1-high monocyte that has a MHC-II receptor complex.

term: MHC-II-negative non-classical monocyte
desc: Gr1-low non-classical monocyte that lacks expression of a MHC-II complex.

term: MHC-II-low non-classical monocyte
desc: Gr1-low non-classical monocyte that has low to intermediate expression of the MHC-II complex.

term: MHC-II-high non-classical monocyte
desc: Gr1-low non-classical monocyte that has high surface expression of a MHC-II complex.

term: lymphoid MHC-II-negative classical monocyte
desc: A MHC-II-negative classical monocyte located in lymphoid tissue that is F4/80-positive, CD11c-negative, and CD11b-high.

term: lymphoid MHC-II-negative non-classical monocyte
desc: A MHC-II-negative classical monocyte located in lymphoid tissue that is F4/80-positive, CD11c-intermediate, and CD11b-high.

term: bone marrow macrophage
desc: A tissue-resident macrophage located in the bone marrow. This cell type is B220-negative, CD3e-negative, Ly-6C-negative, CD115-positive, F4/80-positive.

term: adipose macrophage
desc: A macrophage located in adipose tissue that is CD45-positive, CD11c-positive, and SIRPa-positive.

term: F4/80-negative adipose macrophage
desc: An adipose macrophage that does not express F4/80but is MHC-II-positive. This cell type exhibits autofluorescence under typical flow cyometry conditions.

term: F4/80-positive adipose macrophage
desc: An adipose macrophage that does not express MHC-II but is F4/80-positive.

term: nasal mucosa goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell located in the nasal epithelium.

term: peritubular myoid cell
desc: The flattened smooth myoepithelial cells of mesodermal origin that lie just outside the basal lamina of the seminiferous tubule.

term: dermal melanocyte
desc: A melanocyte that produces pigment in the dermis.

term: hair follicle melanocyte
desc: A melanocyte that produces pigment within the hair follicle.

term: epithelial melanocyte
desc: A melanocyte that produces pigment in the epithelium.

term: retinal melanocyte
desc: A melanocyte of the retina. This cell type is distinct from pigmented retinal epithelium.

term: strial intermediate cell
desc: A melanocyte located between the epithelial marginal cell layer and the mesodermal basal cell layer within the intrastrial space; the predominant cellular component of the electrogenic machinery that generates an endocochlear potential (80-100 mV) .

term: cutaneous/subcutaneous mechanoreceptor cell
desc: A neuronal receptor that respond to mechanical pressure or distortion in the skin.

term: trophoblast giant cell
desc: A trophoblast cell that has a large volume of cytoplasm, is polyploidy and is usually mononuclear but is also occasionally multi-nucleate. This cell type is important in establishing maternal physiology and remodeling of the vasculature of the placenta.

term: double negative thymocyte
desc: A thymocyte that lacks expression of CD4 and CD8.

term: organ of Corti supporting cell
desc: A supporting cell of the organ of Corti.

term: auditory epithelial cell
desc: A specialized cell involved in auditory sensory perception.

term: strial marginal cell
desc: A polarized columnar cell that covesr the lateral surface of the cochlear duct, secretes potassium ions and forms a continuous sheet in contact with the endolymph; marginal cells form extensive interdigitations with the basal and intermediate cells in the normal adult stria.

term: strial basal cell
desc: A polarized cell that is juxtaposed to fibrocytes in the underlying spiral ligament. This cell type secretes potassium ions derived from fibrocytes through gap junctions.

term: cardiocyte
desc: A cell located in the heart, including both muscle and non muscle cells.

term: fetal cardiomyocyte
desc: A fetal and neonatal heart cell that undergoes proliferation and is not yet terminally differentiated into a binucleate or a multinucleate cardiac myocyte.

term: intraepithelial lymphocyte
desc: A T cell that is located in the intestinal epithelium and is capable of a mucosal immune response.

term: primary trophoblast giant cell
desc: A trophoblast giant cell derived from the mural trophectoderm.

term: secondary trophoblast giant cell
desc: A trophoblast giant cell that is derived from ectoplacental cone and, later in gestation, the spongiotrophoblast.

term: spongiotrophoblast cell
desc: A trophoblast cell that arises in the junctional zone (basal plate) of the placenta.

term: P enteroendocrine cell
desc: A P/D1 enteroendocrine cell that is Grimelius positive and stores bombesin-like polypeptide.

term: type D1 enteroendocrine cell
desc: A P/D1 enteroendocrine cell that is argyrophilic and stores vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.

term: type M enteroendocrine cell
desc: An enteroendocrine cell of the small intestine that secretes motilin.

term: adventitial cell
desc: A cell of the adventitial layer of ductal structures such as the uterer, defent duct, biliary duct, etc

term: enteric smooth muscle cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the intestine.

term: liver CD103-negative dendritic cell
desc: A CD11b-positive dendritic cell that is CD11b-high, CD45-positive, MHC-II-positive and CD103-negative.

term: liver CD103-positive dendritic cell
desc: A CD11b-positive dendritic cell that is CD11b-low, CD45-positive, MHC-II-high and CD103-positive that is located in the liver.

term: langerin-positive lymph node dendritic cell
desc: A dermal dendritic cell isolated from skin draining lymph nodes that is langerin-positive, MHC-II-positive, and CD4-negative and CD8a-negative.

term: langerin-negative, CD103-negative lymph node dendritic cell
desc: A dermal dendritic cell isolated from skin draining lymph nodes that is langerin-negative, MHC-II-positive, and CD4-negative and CD8a-negative.

term: CD103-positive, langerin-positive lymph node dendritic cell
desc: A langerin-positive lymph node dendritic cell that is CD103-positive and CD11b-low.

term: CD103-negative, langerin-positive lymph node dendritic cell
desc: A langerin-positive lymph node dendritic cell that is CD103-negative and CD11b-high.

term: CD11b-low, CD103-negative, langerin-negative lymph node dendritic cell
desc: A langerin-negative lymph node dendritic cell that is CD103-negative and CD11b-low.

term: CD11b-high, CD103-negative, langerin-negative lymph node dendritic cell
desc: A langerin-negative lymph node dendritic cell that is CD103-negative and CD11b-high.

term: Vgamma5-positive CD8alpha alpha positive gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A CD8alpha alpha positive gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell that expresses a TCR encoded in part by the Vgamma5 gene segment.

term: Vgamma5-negative CD8alpha alpha positive gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell
desc: A CD8alpha alpha positive gamma-delta intraepithelial T cell that does not express a TCR partially encoded by the Vgamma5 gene segment.

term: interrenal norepinephrine type cell
desc: An interrenal chromaffin cell found in teleosts that contain heterogeneous vesicles with electron-dense granules located asymmetrically within the vesicular membrane.

term: interrenal chromaffin cell
desc: A chromaffin cell interspersed among the interrenal epithelial layer of the anterior kidney of teloest fish.

term: interrenal epinephrin secreting cell
desc: An interrenal chromaffin cell found in teleosts that contain small, homogeneous electron-lucent granules that are separated from the vesicular membrane by a visible halo.

term: kidney epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the kidney.

term: interrenal epithelial cell
desc: An interrenal epithelial kidney cell is an epithelial cell found in the anterior kidney of teleosts fish. This cell type is arranged in layers around the posterior cardinal vein and contains many mitochondria with tubulovesicular cristae. Interrenal chromaffin cells are interspersed among the tissue layer created by this cell type.

term: nephrocyte
desc: An insect excretory cell that regulates haemolymph composition by filtration and filtrate endocytosis.

term: subcutaneous fat cell
desc: A fat cell that is part of subcutaneous adipose tissue.

term: renal filtration cell
desc: A renal filtration cell is a specialized cell of the renal system that filter fluids by charge, size or both.

term: mesonephric glomerular visceral epithelial cell
desc: A mesonephric glomerular visceral epithelial cell is a specialized epithelial cell that contains "feet" that interdigitate with the "feet" of other glomerular epithelial cells in the mesonephros

term: disseminated nephrocyte
desc: A disseminated nephrocyte is a nephrocyte that filters hemolymph and is found at scattered locations in the fat body or other tissues.

term: metanephric glomerular visceral epithelial cell
desc: A metanephric glomerular visceral epithelial cell is a specialized epithelial cell that contains "feet" that interdigitate with the "feet" of other glomerular epithelial cells in the metanephros.

term: CD14-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: A dermal dendritic cell that is CD1a-negative and CD14-positive.

term: immature CD14-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: An immature CD14-positive dermal dendritic cell is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature CD14-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: A mature CD14-positive dermal dendritic cell is CD80-high, CD86-high, MHCII-high and is CD83-positive.

term: CD1a-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: A dermal dendritic cell that is CD1a-positive and CD14-negative.

term: immature CD1a-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: An immature CD1a-positive dermal dendritic cell is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature CD1a-positive dermal dendritic cell
desc: A mature CD1a-positive dermal dendritic cell is CD80-high, CD83-positive, CD86-high, and MHCII-high.

term: CD16-positive myeloid dendritic cell
desc: A myeloid dendritic cell found in the blood that is CD16-positive.

term: immature CD16-positive myeloid dendritic cell
desc: An immature CD16-positive myeloid dendritic cell is CD80-low, CD86-low, and MHCII-low.

term: mature CD16-positive myeloid dendritic cell
desc: A mature CD16-positive myeloid dendritic cell is CD80-high, CD83-positive, CD86-high, and MHCII-high.

term: epithelial cell of cervix
desc: An epithelial cell of the cervix.

term: epithelial cell of amnion
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the amnion.

term: amnion mesenchymal stem cell
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell of the amnion membrane.

term: intrahepatic bile duct epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the intrahepatic portion of the bile duct.

term: aortic smooth muscle cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the aorta.

term: mesenchymal stem cell of the bone marrow
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell that is part of the bone marrow.

term: chorionic membrane mesenchymal stem cell
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell of the chorionic membrane.

term: vein endothelial cell
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the vein.

term: aortic endothelial cell
desc: An arterial endothelial cell that is part of the aorta endothelium.

term: thoracic aorta endothelial cell
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the thoracic endothelium.

term: embryonic blood vessel endothelial progenitor cell
desc: An endothelial progenitor cell that participates in angiogenesis during development.

term: fibroblast of the aortic adventitia
desc: A fibroblast of the aortic adventitia.

term: fibroblast of cardiac tissue
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the heart.

term: fibroblast of choroid plexus
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the choroid plexus.

term: fibroblast of the conjunctiva
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the conjuctiva of the eye.

term: fibroblast of dermis
desc: 

term: fibroblast of gingiva
desc: 

term: fibroblast of lung
desc: A fibroblast that is part of lung.

term: fibroblast of lymphatic vessel
desc: A fibroblast of the lymphatic system.

term: fibroblast of mammary gland
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the mammary gland.

term: fibroblast of periodontium
desc: A fibroblast of the periodontium.

term: fibroblast of pulmonary artery
desc: A fibroblast of pulmonary artery.

term: fibroblast of villous mesenchyme
desc: A fibroblast that is part of villous mesenchyme.

term: hair follicle cell
desc: An animal cell that is part of a hair follicle.

term: inner root sheath cell
desc: An epithelial cell that resides in the inner root sheath of the hair follicle.

term: outer root sheath cell
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the outer root sheath.

term: hair germinal matrix cell
desc: An epidermal cell that is part of the germinal matrix.

term: intestinal epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the intestine.

term: nucleus pulposus cell of intervertebral disc
desc: A connective tissue cell of the nucleus pulposus cell of intervertebral disc.

term: iris pigment epithelial cell
desc: A pigment cell located in the epithelium of the iris.

term: dark melanocyte
desc: A melanocyte that appears darker due to content or amount of melanin granules.

term: light melanocyte
desc: A melanocyte that appears lighter in color.

term: mesenchymal stem cell of Wharton's jelly
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell that is part of Wharton's jelly.

term: mesenchymal stem cell of umbilical cord
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell of the umbilical cord.

term: mesenchymal stem cell of adipose
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell of adipose tissue.

term: hepatic mesenchymal stem cell
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell of liver.

term: vertebral mesenchymal stem cell
desc: A mesenchymal stem cell of the vertebrae.

term: Schwann cell
desc: A glial cell that ensheathes axons of neuron in the peripheral nervous system and are necessary for their maintainance and function.

term: stromal cell of pancreas
desc: A stromal cell of the pancreas.

term: central nervous system pericyte
desc: A pericyte of the central nervous system.

term: perineural cell
desc: A myofibroblast that lies in the connective tissue of the spinal cord that has a distinctly lamellar arrangement.

term: placental epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the placenta.

term: mesenteric preadipocyte
desc: A preadipocyte found in mesenteric tissue.

term: omentum preadipocyte
desc: 

term: preadipocyte of the breast
desc: A preadipocyte that is part of the breast.

term: perirenal preadipocyte
desc: 

term: visceral preadipocyte
desc: A preadipocyte that is part of visceral tissue.

term: subcutaneous preadipocyte
desc: A preadipocyte that is part of subcutaneous tissue.

term: renal cortical epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the kidney cortex.

term: retinal blood vessel endothelial cell
desc: A blood vessel endothelial cell that is part of the retina.

term: retinal pigment epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell of the retinal pigmented epithelium.

term: smooth muscle cell of the umbilical vein
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the umbilical vein.

term: smooth muscle cell of the brachiocephalic vasculature
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the bachiocephalic vasculature.

term: smooth muscle cell of the brain vasculature
desc: A vascular associated smooth muscle cell of the brain vasculature.

term: smooth muscle cell of the pulmonary artery
desc: A smooth muscle of the pulmonary artery.

term: smooth muscle cell of the coronary artery
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the coronary artery.

term: smooth muscle cell of the internal thoracic artery
desc: A smooth muscle of the internal thoracic artery.

term: smooth muscle cell of the umbilical artery
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the umbilical artery.

term: smooth muscle cell of the subclavian artery
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the subclavian artery.

term: smooth muscle cell of the carotid artery
desc: Smooth muscle cell of the carotid artery.

term: smooth muscle cell of bladder
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the bladder.

term: bronchial smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: smooth muscle cell of the esophagus
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the esophagus.

term: smooth muscle cell of trachea
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the trachea.

term: uterine smooth muscle cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell of the uterus.

term: annulus pulposus cell
desc: 

term: astrocyte of the cerebellum
desc: An astrocyte of the cerebellum.

term: astrocyte of the hippocampus
desc: 

term: astrocyte of the cerebral cortex
desc: An astrocyte of the cerebral cortex.

term: astrocyte of the spinal cord
desc: An astrocyte of the spinal cord.

term: migratory enteric neural crest cell
desc: A neural crest cell that gives rise to cells of the enteric nervous system.

term: hippocampal neuron
desc: A neuron of the hippocampus.

term: neuron of cerebral cortex
desc: A CNS neuron of the cerebral cortex.

term: raphe nuclei neuron
desc: A neuron of the raphe nuclei.

term: neuron of the dorsal spinal cord
desc: A CNS neuron of the dorsal spinal cord.

term: neuron of the ventral spinal cord
desc: A neuron of the ventral spinal cord.

term: striatum neuron
desc: A neuron of the striatum.

term: neuron of the substantia nigra
desc: A neuron of the substantia nigra.

term: adipocyte of omentum tissue
desc: A fat cell that is part of omentum tissue.

term: perirenal adipocyte cell
desc: A fat cell of perirenal fat tissue.

term: adipocyte of breast
desc: A fat cell that is part of the breast.

term: endothelial cell of umbilical vein
desc: An endothelial cell of the umbilical vein.

term: adult endothelial progenitor cell
desc: An adult angioblastic cell released from the bone marrow, capable of blood circulation and participation in angiogenesis by differentiating into blood vessel endothelial cells. Their existence is controversial.

term: skin fibroblast
desc: A fibroblast of skin.

term: gingival epithelial cell
desc: 

term: prostate stromal cell
desc: A stromal cell of the prostate.

term: acinar cell of salivary gland
desc: An acinar cell of salivary gland.

term: paneth cell of the appendix
desc: A paneth cell of the appendix.

term: seminiferous tubule epithelial cell
desc: A cell of the seminiferous tubule epithelium.

term: immature astrocyte
desc: An immature astrocyte.

term: mature astrocyte
desc: A mature astrocyte that is capable of producing cytokines.

term: immature microglial cell
desc: An immature microglial cell with a ramified morphology.

term: mature microglial cell
desc: A mature microglial cell that has changed shape to an amoeboid morphology and is capable of cytokine production and antigen presentation.

term: actinomycete-type spore
desc: A spore formed from bacteria in the order Actinomycetales.

term: epithelial cell of upper respiratory tract
desc: 

term: epithelial cell of lower respiratory tract
desc: 

term: respiratory basal cell
desc: A basal cell in the respiratory tract.

term: epithelial cell of anal column
desc: An epithelial cell of the anal column.

term: nonkeratinized epithelial cell of anal column
desc: A nonkeratinized epithelial cell of the anal canal.

term: nonkeratinized epithelial cell of inferior part of anal canal
desc: A nonkeratinized cell epithleial cell of the inferior part of the anal canal.

term: keratinized epithelial cell of the anal canal
desc: An epithelial cell of the anal canal that is keratinized. This cell type is found towards the lower, rectal end of the anal canal.

term: bronchioalveolar stem cell
desc: A respiratory stem cell found at the junction of the terminal (conductive) bronchiole and the respiratory bronchiole. This cell types gives rise to alveolar cell types and Clara cells in response to lung injury. This cell type expresses markers Scgb1a1 and Sftpc.

term: amniotic stem cell
desc: An amniotic stem cell is a mesenchymalstem cell extracted from amniotic fluid. Amniotic stem cells are able to differentiate into various tissue type such as skin, cartilage, cardiac tissue, nerves, muscle, and bone

term: amniotic epithelial stem cell
desc: An epithelial fate stem cell derived form the amnion membrane.

term: epithelial cell of esophageal gland proper
desc: An epithelial cell of the esophageal gland proper.

term: epithelial cell of esophageal cardiac gland
desc: An epithelial cell of the esophageal cardiac gland that occurs both in the proximal and distal esophagus, within the lamina propia.

term: nonkeratinized cell of stratum corneum of esophageal epithelium
desc: An epithelial cell of stratum corneum of esophageal epithelium that lacks keratin.

term: endo-epithelial cell of tympanic part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An endothelial cell of viscerocranial mucosa that is part of the tympanic region of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: endo-epithelial cell of pharyngotympanic part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An endocranial viscerocranial mucosa cell that is part of viscerocranial mucosa.

term: obsolete epithelial cell of buccal part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An ecto-epithelial cell of the buccal region of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: obsolete epithelial cell of anterior palatal part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An ecto-epithelial cell of the palatal region of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: obsolete epithelial cell of nasal part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An ecto-epithelial cell of the nasal region of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: obsolete epithelial cell of gingival part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An ecto-epithelial cell of the gingival region of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: obsolete epithelial cell of paranasal sinus part of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An ecto-epithelial cell of the paranasal region of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: endothelial cell of venous sinus of spleen
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the venous sinus of spleen. This endothelial cell has an elongated, spindle-shaped, flattened morphology that is parallel to long axis of sinus. This cell type rests on a basement membrane interrupted by numerous narrow slits.

term: endothelial cell of high endothelial venule
desc: A venule endothelial cell that is cubodial, expresses leukocyte-specific receptors, and allows for passage of lymphocytes into bloodstream.

term: squamous endothelial cell
desc: A endothelial cell of the venule that is squamous shaped. This is in contrast to the cubodial shape of high endothelial venule cells.

term: epithelial cell of stratum corneum of esophageal epithelium
desc: An epithelial cell of stratum corneum of esophageal epithelium.

term: epithelial cell of stratum spinosum of esophageal epithelium
desc: An epithelial cell of stratum spinosum of esophageal epithelium.

term: glandular cell of endometrium
desc: A glandular epithelial cell of the endometrium.

term: glandular cell of esophagus
desc: A glandular epithelial cell of the esophagus.

term: glandular cell of the large intestine
desc: A glandular epithelial cell of the large intestine.

term: glandular cell of stomach
desc: A glandular epithelial cell that is part of the stomach.

term: luminal cell of acinus of lactiferous gland
desc: A luminal epithelial cell of mammary gland located in acinus of structure.

term: luminal cell of lactiferous terminal ductal lobular unit
desc: A luminal cell of terminal ducts, i.e.e the terminal branch of a lactiferous duct which alveolar cells drain into.

term: luminal cell of lactiferous duct
desc: A luminal epithelial cell of the lactiferous duct. This cuboidal epithelial cell expresses keratin-18 and is estrogen-receptor alpha positive.

term: myocardial endocrine cell of atrium
desc: A myocardial endocrine cell that is part of the atrium.

term: cardioblast
desc: A stem cell that can give rise to multiple cell types (i.e. smooth muscle, endothelial) in the developing heart.

term: otic fibrocyte
desc: A fibrocyte of the cochlea that has specialized structural and molecular adaptions.

term: type 2 otic fibrocyte
desc: An otic fibrocyte that underlies the spiral prominence and is part of a mesenchymal gap junction network that regulates ionic homeostasis of the endolymph.

term: type 5 otic fibrocyte
desc: An otic fibrocyte that resides above the stria vasularis and is part of a mesenchymal gap junction network that regulates ionic homeostasis of the endolymph.

term: type 4 otic fibrocyte
desc: An otic fibrocyte that is lateral to the basilar membrane and anchoris it to the lateral wall.

term: type 3 otic fibrocyte
desc: An otic fibrocyte that lines the otic capsule.

term: type 1 otic fibrocyte
desc: An otic fibrocyte that underlies the stria vascularis and is part of a mesenchymal gap junction network that regulates ionic homeostasis of the endolymph.

term: endothelial stalk cell
desc: An endothelial stalk cell is a specialized endothelial cell that follows behind the tip cell of an angiogenic sprout.

term: retinal progenitor cell
desc: A multi-fate stem cell that can give rise to different retinal cell types including rod and cone cells.

term: tongue muscle cell
desc: A skeletal muscle cell that is part of the tongue.

term: H minus
desc: A S. pombe mating type determined by the mat1-Mc and mat1-Mi on the mat1 locus.

term: H plus
desc: A S. pombe cell type determined by mat1-Pc and mat1-Pi on the mat1 locus.

term: neural crest derived neuroblast
desc: A neuroblast derived from a neural crest cell.

term: naive regulatory T cell
desc: A regulatory T cell that has not encountered antigen.

term: memory regulatory T cell
desc: A CD4-positive, CD25-positive alpha-beta regulatory T cell that has encountered antigen.

term: natural helper lymphocyte
desc: A lymphocyte found in adipose tissue that lacks lineage markers of other lymphocytes but is capable of mediating TH2 cytokine responses. This cell type is found in fat associated lymphoid clusters, proliferates in response to IL2 and produce large amounts of TH2 cytokines such as IL5, IL6 and IL13

term: PP cell of intestine
desc: A PP cell found in intestine.

term: kidney cortical cell
desc: 

term: spinal cord interneuron
desc: A CNS interneuron located in the spinal cord.

term: iridoblast
desc: A non-terminally differentiated cell that originates from the neural crest and differentiates into an iridophore.

term: xanthoblast
desc: A non-terminally differentiated cell that differentiates into a xanthophore.

term: leucoblast
desc: A non-terminally differentiated cell that originates from the neural crest and differentiates into a leucophore.

term: pigment erythroblast
desc: A non-terminally differentiated cell that originates from the neural crest and differentiates into an erythrophore.

term: cyanoblast
desc: A non-terminally differentiated cell that originates from the neural crest and differentiates into a cyanophore.

term: ionocyte
desc: Specialized epithelial cells involved in the maintenance of osmotic homeostasis. They are characterized by abundant mitochondria and ion transporters. In amniotes, they are present in the renal system. In freshwater fish, ionocytes in the skin and gills help maintain osmotic homeostasis by absorbing salt from the external environment.

term: Kolmer-Agduhr neuron
desc: Kolmer-Agduhr neurons are ciliated GABAergic neurons that contact the central canal of the spinal cord and have ipsilateral ascending axons.

term: macular hair cell
desc: An auditory hair cell located in the macula that is sensitive to auditory stimuli.

term: renal principal cell
desc: A cuboidal epithelial cell of the kidney which regulates sodium and potassium balance. The activity of sodium and potassium channels on the cells apical membrane is regulated by aldosterone and vasopressin. In mammals these cells are located in the renal collecting ducts.

term: renal intercalated cell
desc: A cuboidal epithelial cell of the kidney that regulates acid/base balance.

term: renal alpha-intercalated cell
desc: A cuboidal epithelial cell of the kidney which secretes acid and reabsorbs base to regulate acid/base balance.

term: multi-ciliated epithelial cell
desc: A ciliated epithelial cell with many cilium.

term: single ciliated epithelial cell
desc: A ciliated epithelial cell with a single cilium.

term: auditory epithelial support cell
desc: A non-sensory cell that extends from the basement membrane to the apical surface of the auditory epithelium and provides support for auditory hair cells.

term: inner phalangeal cell
desc: An auditory epithelial support cell that surrounds the nerve fibers and synapses of the auditory inner hair cells.

term: obsolete apical cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0030007 from Plant Ontology instead. The apical cell is the upper cell formed after the first division of a plant zygote.

term: obsolete plant basal cell
desc: Obsolete. Use PO:0002002 from Plant Ontology instead. The lower cell formed after the first division of a plant zygote.

term: ghrelin secreting cell
desc: A cell that secretes ghrelin, the peptide hormone that stimulates hunger.

term: pancreatic epsilon cell
desc: Ghrelin secreting cells found in the found in the exocrine pancreas.

term: lymphangioblast
desc: Lymphatic progenitor cells.

term: mesenchymal lymphangioblast
desc: Mesenchymal derived lymphatic progenitor cells that give rise to the superficial lymphatics.

term: vascular lymphangioblast
desc: Lymphatic progenitor cells, derived from the veins, that give rise to lymphatic endothelial cells.

term: branchiomotor neuron
desc: Cranial motor neuron which innervates muscles derived from the branchial (pharyngeal) arches.

term: somatomotor neuron
desc: A motor neuron that innervates a skeletal muscle.  These motor neurons are all excitatory and cholinergic.

term: visceromotor neuron
desc: A motor neuron that synapses to parasympathetic neurons that innervate tear glands, sweat glands, and the smooth muscles and glands of the pulmonary, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal systems.

term: hepatoblast
desc: Multi fate stem cell that gives rise to to both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes as descendants.

term: preameloblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that has the potential to develop into an ameloblast. Located in the inner enamel epithelium, these cells elongate, their nuclei shift distally (away from the dental papilla), and their cytoplasm becomes filled with organelles needed for synthesis and secretion of enamel proteins.

term: skeletogenic cell
desc: Cell that has the potential to form a skeletal cell type (e.g. cells in periosteum, cells in marrow) and produce extracellular matrix (often mineralized) and skeletal tissue (often mineralized).

term: precementoblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that has the potential to develop into a cementoblast.

term: preodontoblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that has the potential to form an odontoblast, deposits predentine, and arises from a cranial neural crest cell.

term: premigratory neural crest cell
desc: Cell that is part of the neural crest region of the neuroepithelium, prior to migration. Note that not all premigratory neural crest cells may become migratory neural crest cells.

term: notochordal cell
desc: Cell that is part of the notochord.

term: chordamesodermal cell
desc: Mesodermal cell that is axially located and gives rise to the cells of the notochord.

term: notochordal sheath cell
desc: Notochordal cell that is part of the outer epithelium of the notochord and surrounds the vacuolated notochord cells.

term: notochordal vacuole cell
desc: Notochordal cell that is inner portion of the notochord and becomes vacuolated as development proceeds.

term: prechondroblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that has the potential to develop into a chondroblast; and arises from neural crest, meseosdermal and notochordal and connective tissue cells.

term: preosteoblast
desc: Skeletogenic cell that has the potential to transform into an osteoblast, and develops from neural crest or mesodermal cells.

term: enteric neuron
desc: Neuron that is part of the enteric nervous system.

term: non-terminally differentiated odontoblast
desc: Odontoblast that non-terminally differentiated, located in the odontogenic papilla and dentine tissue, and transforms from a odontoblast cell.

term: terminally differentiated odontoblast
desc: Odontoblast that is terminally differentiated and derived from an odontogenic papilla and associated with dentine.

term: obsolete cell line cell
desc: OBSOLETE: A cultured cell that has been passaged at least one time in culture.

term: obsolete mortal cell line cell
desc: OBSOLETE: A cell line cell that is expected to be capable of replicating a limited number of times in culture before undergoing senescence. Mortal cell line cells cannot be propagated indefinitely (as immortal cell line cells can).

term: adaxial cell
desc: Muscle precursor cell that is adjacent to the notochord and part of the presomitic mesoderm.

term: Stiftchenzellen
desc: An epidermal cell with apical microvilli or a single apical projection have synaptic associations with nerve fibres in the epidermis.

term: epidermal ciliary cell
desc: Ciliated cell of the embryonic epidermis and functions in embryonic movements.

term: epidermal mucus secreting cell
desc: 

term: bottle cell
desc: Characteristic early embryonic cell with a bottle or flask shape that is first to migrate inwards at the blastopore during gastrulation in amphibians.

term: alarm substance cell
desc: Secretory cell that produces a chemical mixture that triggers antipredator behavior. The substance is released only upon disruption of the epidermis. [Behavior of teleost fishes, second edition, edited by Pitcher, 1992]

term: micropylar cell
desc: A specialized pore forming cell of the follicle, located adjacent to the animal pole of the oocyte. The micropylar cell makes the single micropyle (pore) through the chorion through which the sperm fertilizes the egg.

term: flask cell
desc: Epidermal cell rich in mitochondria. In amphibians, appears during metamorphosis.

term: non-striated muscle cell
desc: Any muscle cell in which the fibers are not organised into sarcomeres.

term: hematopoietic precursor cell
desc: Any hematopoietic cell that is a precursor of some other hematopoietic cell type.

term: skeletal muscle fiber
desc: A transversely striated, synctial cell of skeletal muscle. It is formed when proliferating myoblasts exit the cell cycle, differentiate and fuse.

term: somatic muscle myotube
desc: A myotube that is part of some somatic muscle.  Examples include arthropod somatic muscle cells.

term: somatic muscle cell
desc: A muscle cell that is part of some somatic muscle.

term: obliquely striated somatic muscle cell
desc: A somatic muscle cell that is oblquely striated.  Examples include the somatic muscles of nematodes.

term: muscle founder cell
desc: A myoblast that detemines the properties (size, shape and attachment to the epidermis) of a `somatic muscle myotube` (CL:0008003) .  It develops into a somatic muscle myotube via fusion with `fusion component myoblasts` (CL:0000621).

term: visceral muscle cell
desc: A muscle cell that is part of some visceral muscle

term: striated visceral muscle cell
desc: A visceral muscle cell that is striated.  Examples include the visceral muscle cells of arhtropods.

term: transversely striated visceral muscle cell
desc: A visceral muscle that is transversely striated.  Examples include the visceral muscle cells of arthropods.

term: cranial somatomotor neuron
desc: A cranial motor neuron whose soma is located in the midbrain andor hindbrain and which innervates the skeletal muscles of the eye or tongue.

term: skeletal muscle satellite stem cell
desc: A skeletal muscle satellite cell that divides by stem cell division.  A proportion of this population undergoes symmetric stem cell division, producing two skeletal muscle satellite stem cells. The rest undergo asymmetric stem cell division - retaining their identity while budding off a daughter cell that differentiates into an adult skeletal muscle myoblast.

term: quiescent skeletal muscle satellite cell
desc: A skeletal muscle satellite cell that is mitotically quiescent.  These cells are wedge shaped and have a large nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio with few organelles, a small nucleus and condensed interphase chromatin. Satellite cells typically remain in this state until activated following muscle damage.

term: cranial visceromotor neuron
desc: A visceromotor motor neuron whose soma is located in the hindbrain, and which synapses to parasympathetic neurons that innervate tear glands, sweat glands, and the smooth muscles of the head.

term: excitatory motor neuron
desc: ['A motor neuron that is capable of directly inducing muscle contraction.']

term: inhibitory motor neuron
desc: ['A motor neuron that is capable of directly inhibiting muscle contraction.']

term: activated skeletal muscle satellite cell
desc: A skeletal muscle cell that has become mitotically active - typically following muscle damage.

term: adult skeletal muscle myoblast
desc: A skeletal muscle myoblast that is part of a skeletal mucle.  These cells are formed following acivation and division of skeletal muscle satellite cells. They form a transient population that is lost when they fuse to form skeletal muscle fibers.

term: somatic muscle myoblast
desc: ['A myoblast that is commited to developing into a somatic muscle.']

term: mesenchymal cell
desc: ['A non-polarised cell precursor cell that is part of some mesenchyme, is associated with the cell matrix but is not connected to other cells and is capable of migration.']

term: skeletal muscle satellite myogenic cell
desc: A skeletal muscle satellite cell that undergoes symmetric division to produce two adult skeleltal muscle myoblasts.

term: anterior lateral line ganglion neuron
desc: 

term: endocardial cushion cell
desc: A mesenchymal cell of the endocardial cushion.   These cells develop via an epithelial to mesenchymal transition when endocardial cells break cell-to-cell contacts and migrate into the cardiac jelly. Cells from this population form the heart septa and valves.

term: cardiac fibroblast
desc: 

term: pancreatic endocrine cell
desc: An endocrine cell that is part of the pancreas.

term: noradrenergic neuron
desc: A neuron that release noradrenaline (noriphinephrine) as a neurotransmitter.

term: open tracheal system tracheocyte
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the epithelium of a tracheal tube in an open tracheal system, such as that found in insects.

term: sensory neuron of spinal nerve
desc: A sensory neuron of the spinal nerve that senses body position and sends information about how much the muscle is stretched to the spinal cord.

term: compound eye retinal cell
desc: ['Any cell in the compound eye, a light sensing organ composed of ommatidia.']

term: inflammatory cell
desc: ['Any cell participating in the inflammatory response to a foreign substance, e.g. neutrophil, macrophage.']

term: larval midgut cell
desc: ['Any cell in the midgut (middle subdivision of a digestive tract) of a larva.']

term: retinal cell
desc: Any cell in the retina, the innermost layer or coating at the back of the eyeball, which is sensitive to light and in which the optic nerve terminates.

term: salivary gland cell
desc: ['Any cell in a salivary gland.']

term: keratinized cell of hair follicle
desc: A hair follicle matrix region cell which synthesizes keratin and undergoes a characteristic change as it moves upward from the hair bulb to become the hair medulla cortex and hair root sheath.

term: stromal cell of bone marrow
desc: ['a stromal cell that is part_of a bone marrow']

term: epithelial cell of umbilical artery
desc: ['a epithelial cell that is part_of a umbilical artery']

term: epithelial cell of alveolus of lung
desc: ['a epithelial cell that is part_of a alveolus of lung']

term: mononuclear cell of bone marrow
desc: ['a mononuclear cell that is part_of a bone marrow']

term: atrioventricular bundle cell
desc: A specialized cardiomyocyte that transmit signals from the AV node to the cardiac Purkinje fibers.

term: cardiac blood vessel endothelial cell
desc: 

term: His-Purkinje system cell
desc: 

term: cardiac endothelial cell
desc: 

term: camera-type eye photoreceptor cell
desc: 

term: cerebellar stellate cell
desc: 

term: cerebral cortex GABAergic interneuron
desc: ['a GABAergic interneuron that is part_of a cerebral cortex']

term: cerebral cortex neuron
desc: ['a neuron that is part_of a cerebral cortex']

term: type I pinealocyte
desc: 

term: type II pinealocyte
desc: 

term: coronet cell
desc: A highly specialized cell type exclusive to and forming neuroepithelium of the Saccus vasculosus, covering the caudal diverticulum of the infundibular recess.

term: collar cell
desc: A cell with a flagellum surrounded by a collar of microvilli. The motion of the flagellum draws water past the microvilli, serving either a feeding or sensory function. Collar cells are found in multiple animals, including sponges, echinoderms, and cnidarians. They are also found outside animals in the choanoflagellates. Although collar cells are superficially similar, their cytoskeletal structure and functional biology are different in different groups of organisms.

term: cardiac glial cell
desc: 

term: cardiac myoblast
desc: 

term: cardiac neuron
desc: 

term: dorsal horn interneuron
desc: A CNS interneuron located in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.

term: spinal cord motor neuron
desc: A motor neuron that passes from the spinal cord toward or to a muscle and conducts an impulse that causes movement.

term: lateral motor column neuron
desc: A motor neuron that is generated only on limb levels and send axons into the limb mesenchyme.

term: magnocellular neurosecretory cell (duplicate class)
desc: A neurosecretory neuron residing mainly in the hypothalamic supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei and in a number of smaller accessory cell groups between these two nuclei, that secretes the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin.

term: lens fiber cell
desc: A vetebrate lens cell that is any of the elongated, tightly packed cells that make up the bulk of the mature lens in a camera-type eye.

term: GABAergic interneuron
desc: An interneuron that uses GABA as a vesicular neurotransmitter.

term: Lugaro cell
desc: An inhibitory GABAergic interneuron found in the cerebellar cortex.

term: paraxial cell
desc: A cell in the area of mesoderm in the neurulating embryo that flanks and forms simultaneously with the neural tube. The cells of this region give rise to somites.

term: embryonic hemocyte
desc: A hemocyte derived from head mesoderm, which enters the hemolymph as acirculating cell.

term: embryonic plasmatocyte
desc: A plasmatocyte derived from head mesoderm.

term: lateral mesodermal cell
desc: A cell derived from the mesoderm that is found at the periphery of the embryo.

term: intermediate mesodermal cell
desc: A cell derived from the mesoderm that is located between the paraxial mesoderm and the lateral plate.

term: neural crest cell
desc: A cell of the neural crest. Neural crest cells are multipotent. Premigratory neural crest cells are found at the neural plate boarder, some of which will undergo ectomesynchymal transition and delamination to form migratory neural crest cells.

term: galanergic neuron
desc: Neuron that secretes the neurotransmitter galanin.

term: chorionic trophoblast cell
desc: Cells of the uterine chorion that acquire specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize chorionic trophoblasts. These cells will migrate towards the spongiotrophoblast layer and give rise to syncytiotrophoblasts of the labyrinthine layer.

term: parasympathetic neuron
desc: Parasympathetic neurons are part of the parasympathetic nervous sysem and the cell bodies lie in the brain and sacral region of the spinal cord. The neurons are mainly cholinergic.

term: sympathetic neuron
desc: Sympathetic neurons are part of the sympathetic nervous system and are primarily adrenergic producing the neurotransmitter noradrenalin along with other neuropeptides.

term: interplexiform cell
desc: A type of interneuron in the retinal inner nuclear layer which 
carries information from the inner plexiform layer and the outer 
plexiform layer.

term: dopamanergic interplexiform cell
desc: A type of interneuron in the retinal inner nuclear layer which 
carries information from the inner plexiform layer and the outer 
plexiform layer, using dopamine.

term: GABAnergic interplexiform cell
desc: A type of interneuron in the retinal inner nuclear layer which 
carries information from the inner plexiform layer and the outer 
plexiform layer using GABA.

term: Muller cell
desc: Astrocyte-like radial glial cell that extends vertically throughout the retina, with the nucleus are usually in the middle of the inner nuclear layer.

term: colon epithelial cell
desc: Epithelial cell that is part of the colon epithelium.

term: hypocretin-secreting neuron
desc: A neuron that releases hypocretin as a neurotransmitter.

term: histaminergic neuron
desc: Neuron that secretes histamine.

term: gonadotropin releasing neuron
desc: Neuroendocrine cells that are born in the nasal placode during embryonic development and migrate through the nose and forebrain to the hypothalamus, where they regulate reproduction.

term: magnocellular neurosecretory cell
desc: Neurons part of the hypothalamic supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei that secrete the hormones, oxytocin and vasopressin into the systemic circulation from the posterior pituitary gland.

term: spiral ganglion neuron
desc: Neuron found in the spriral ganglion.

term: segmented neutrophil of bone marrow
desc: A segmented neutrophilic cell of the bone marrow reserve pool that expresses CD11b (integrin alpha-M) and high levels of CD16 (low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor III) on its cell surface.

term: precursor cell
desc: A cell that, by division or terminal differentiation, can give rise to other cell types.

term: astrocyte of the forebrain
desc: ['An astrocyte of the forebrain.']

term: neuron of the forebrain
desc: ['A CNS neuron of the forebrain.']

term: forebrain radial glial cell
desc: 

term: cranial motor neuron
desc: Motor neuron that innervate muscles that control eye, jaw, and facial movements of the vertebrate head and parasympathetic neurons that innervate certain glands and organs.

term: retrotrapezoid nucleus neuron
desc: 

term: mesonephric nephron tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: forebrain neuroblast
desc: 

term: lateral line nerve glial cell
desc: 

term: spinal cord radial glial cell
desc: 

term: stretch receptor cell
desc: 

term: stratified keratinized epithelial stem cell
desc: 

term: stratified non keratinized epithelial stem cell
desc: 

term: pronephric nephron tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: metanephric nephron tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: lung goblet cell
desc: 

term: heart valve cell
desc: 

term: Malpighian tubule stellate cell
desc: A specialized epithelial secretory cell that moves chloride ions and water across the tubule epithelium.

term: malpighian tubule tip cell
desc: 

term: pillar cell
desc: A rod-like cell in the inner ear, having their heads joined and their bases on the basilar membrane widely separated so as to form a spiral tunnel known as the tunnel of Corti.

term: growth plate cartilage chondrocyte
desc: 

term: stomach neuroendocrine cell
desc: 

term: lung neuroendocrine cell
desc: 

term: posterior lateral line nerve glial cell
desc: 

term: anterior lateral line nerve glial cell
desc: 

term: posterior lateral line ganglion neuron
desc: 

term: lung ciliated cell
desc: 

term: lung secretory cell
desc: 

term: trophectodermal cell
desc: 

term: smooth muscle cell of small intestine
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the small intestine.

term: smooth muscle fiber of duodenum
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the duodenum.

term: smooth muscle fiber of jejunum
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the jejunum.

term: smooth muscle fiber of ileum
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the ileum.

term: smooth muscle cell of large intestine
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the large intestine.

term: smooth muscle cell of colon
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the colon.

term: smooth muscle cell of cecum
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the cecum.

term: smooth muscle fiber of ascending colon
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the ascending colon.

term: smooth muscle fiber of transverse colon
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the transverse colon.

term: smooth muscle fiber of descending colon
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the descending colon.

term: smooth muscle cell of sigmoid colon
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the sigmoid colon.

term: smooth muscle cell of rectum
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the rectum.

term: myocyte of anterior internodal tract
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the anterior internodal tract.

term: myocyte of atrial branch of anterior internodal tract
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the atrial branch of anterior internodal tract.

term: myocyte of atrial septal branch of anterior internodal tract
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the atrial septal branch of anterior internodal tract.

term: myocyte of middle internodal tract
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the middle internodal tract.

term: myocyte of posterior internodal tract
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the posterior internodal tract.

term: epithelial cell of urethra
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the urethra.

term: mesothelial cell of dura mater
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the dura mater.

term: fibroblast of connective tissue of prostate
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the connective tissue of prostate.

term: fibroblast of outer membrane of prostatic capsule
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the outer membrane of prostatic capsule.

term: fibroblast of subepithelial connective tissue of prostatic gland
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the subepithelial connective tissue of prostatic gland.

term: fibroblast of papillary layer of dermis
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the papillary layer of dermis.

term: fibroblast of areolar connective tissue
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the areolar connective tissue.

term: fibroblast of connective tissue of nonglandular part of prostate
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the connective tissue of nonglandular part of prostate.

term: fibroblast of connective tissue of glandular part of prostate
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the connective tissue of glandular part of prostate.

term: fibroblast of tunica adventitia of artery
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the tunica adventitia of artery.

term: fibroblast of dense regular elastic tissue
desc: A fibroblast that is part of the dense regular elastic tissue.

term: fibrocyte of adventitia of ureter
desc: A fibrocyte that is part of the adventitia of ureter.

term: epicardial adipocyte
desc: A fat cell that is part of the epicardial fat.

term: adipocyte of epicardial fat of right ventricle
desc: A fat cell that is part of the epicardial fat of right ventricle.

term: adipocyte of epicardial fat of left ventricle
desc: A fat cell that is part of the epicardial fat of left ventricle.

term: bronchial goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of bronchus.

term: gastric goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of stomach.

term: gastric cardiac gland goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of gastric cardiac gland.

term: principal gastric gland goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of principal gastric gland.

term: obsolete goblet cell of epithelium of small intestine
desc: OBSOLETE: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of small intestine.

term: intestinal villus goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of intestinal villus.

term: obsolete small intestine crypt goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of crypt of lieberkuhn of small intestine.

term: obsolete goblet cell of epithelium proper of small intestine
desc: OBSOLETE: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium proper of small intestine.

term: large intestine goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of large intestine.

term: large intestine crypt goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of crypt of lieberkuhn of large intestine.

term: pancreatic goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of pancreatic duct.

term: pylroric gastric gland goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of pyloric gland.

term: duodenal goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium proper of duodenum.

term: jejunal goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium proper of jejunum.

term: ileal goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium proper of ileum.

term: appendix goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium proper of appendix.

term: obsolete goblet cell of epithelium proper of large intestine
desc: OBSOLETE: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium proper of large intestine.

term: tracheal goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the epithelium of trachea.

term: serous cell of epithelium of trachea
desc: A serous secreting cell that is part of the epithelium of trachea.

term: serous cell of epithelium of bronchus
desc: A serous secreting cell that is part of the epithelium of bronchus.

term: serous cell of epithelium of terminal bronchiole
desc: A serous secreting cell that is part of the epithelium of terminal bronchiole.

term: serous cell of epithelium of lobular bronchiole
desc: A serous secreting cell that is part of the epithelium of bronchiole.

term: enterocyte of epithelium of small intestine
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium of small intestine.

term: enterocyte of epithelium of intestinal villus
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium of intestinal villus.

term: enterocyte of epithelium of duodenal gland
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium of duodenal gland.

term: enterocyte of epithelium of crypt of Lieberkuhn of small intestine
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium of crypt of lieberkuhn of small intestine.

term: enterocyte of epithelium proper of small intestine
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium proper of small intestine.

term: enterocyte of epithelium proper of duodenum
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium proper of duodenum.

term: enterocyte of epithelium proper of jejunum
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium proper of jejunum.

term: enterocyte of epithelium proper of ileum
desc: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium proper of ileum.

term: paneth cell of epithelium of small intestine
desc: A paneth cell that is part of the epithelium of small intestine.

term: paneth cell of epithelium proper of small intestine
desc: A Paneth cell that is part of the epithelium proper of small intestine.

term: paneth cell of epithelium of crypt of Lieberkuhn of small intestine
desc: A Paneth cell that is part of the epithelium of crypt of lieberkuhn of small intestine.

term: vacuolar absorptive cell of epithelium proper of large intestine
desc: MERGED DEFINITION: TARGET DEFINITION: A columnar cell of the colon that is part of the epithelium proper of large intestine. SOURCE DEFINITION: An enterocyte that is part of the epithelium proper of large intestine.

term: vacuolar absorptive cell of epithelium of colon
desc: A columnar cell of the colon that is part of the colonic epithelium.

term: basal cell of epithelium of trachea
desc: A basal cell that is part of the epithelium of trachea.

term: basal cell of epithelium of bronchus
desc: A basal cell found in the bronchus epithelium.

term: basal cell of epithelium of terminal bronchiole
desc: A basal cell that is part of the epithelium of terminal bronchiole.

term: basal cell of epithelium of respiratory bronchiole
desc: A basal cell that is part of the epithelium of respiratory bronchiole.

term: basal cell of epithelium of lobular bronchiole
desc: A basal cell that is part of the epithelium of bronchiole.

term: microfold cell of epithelium of small intestine
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium of small intestine.

term: microfold cell of epithelium of intestinal villus
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium of intestinal villus.

term: microfold cell of epithelium proper of small intestine
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium proper of small intestine.

term: microfold cell of epithelium proper of duodenum
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium proper of duodenum.

term: microfold cell of epithelium proper of jejunum
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium proper of jejunum.

term: microfold cell of epithelium proper of ileum
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium proper of ileum.

term: microfold cell of epithelium proper of appendix
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium proper of appendix.

term: microfold cell of epithelium proper of large intestine
desc: A M cell that is part of the epithelium proper of large intestine.

term: transitional myocyte of interatrial septum
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the interatrial septum.

term: transitional myocyte of interventricular septum
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the interventricular septum.

term: transitional myocyte of atrial branch of anterior internodal tract
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the atrial branch of anterior internodal tract.

term: transitional myocyte of anterior internodal tract
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the anterior internodal tract.

term: transitional myocyte of atrial septal branch of anterior internodal tract
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the atrial septal branch of anterior internodal tract.

term: transitional myocyte of middle internodal tract
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the middle internodal tract.

term: transitional myocyte of posterior internodal tract
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the posterior internodal tract.

term: transitional myocyte of anterior division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the anterior division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle.

term: transitional myocyte of septal division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the septal division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle.

term: transitional myocyte of left branch of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the left branch of atrioventricular bundle.

term: transitional myocyte of right branch of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the right branch of atrioventricular bundle.

term: transitional myocyte of atrial part of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the atrial part of atrioventricular bundle.

term: transitional myocyte of ventricular part of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the ventricular part of atrioventricular bundle.

term: transitional myocyte of posterior division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the posterior division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle.

term: myocardial endocrine cell of septal division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A myocardial endocrine cell that is part of the septal division of left branch of atrioventricular bundle.

term: Purkinje myocyte of interventricular septum
desc: A Purkinje myocyte that is part of the interventricular septum.

term: dense-core granulated cell of epithelium of trachea
desc: A Feyrter cell that is part of the epithelium of trachea.

term: type 1 vestibular sensory cell of stato-acoustic epithelium
desc: A type I vestibular sensory cell that is part of the stato-acoustic epithelium.

term: type 1 vestibular sensory cell of epithelium of macula of utricle of membranous labyrinth
desc: A type I vestibular sensory cell that is part of the epithelium of macula of utricle of membranous labyrinth.

term: type 1 vestibular sensory cell of epithelium of macula of saccule of membranous labyrinth
desc: A type I vestibular sensory cell that is part of the epithelium of macula of saccule of membranous labyrinth.

term: type 1 vestibular sensory cell of epithelium of crista of ampulla of semicircular duct of membranous labyrinth
desc: A type I vestibular sensory cell that is part of the epithelium of crista of ampulla of semicircular duct of membranous labyrinth.

term: type 2 vestibular sensory cell of stato-acoustic epithelium
desc: A type II vestibular sensory cell that is part of the stato-acoustic epithelium.

term: type 2 vestibular sensory cell of epithelium of macula of utricle of membranous labyrinth
desc: A type II vestibular sensory cell that is part of the epithelium of macula of utricle of membranous labyrinth.

term: type 2 vestibular sensory cell of epithelium of macula of saccule of membranous labyrinth
desc: A type II vestibular sensory cell that is part of the epithelium of macula of saccule of membranous labyrinth.

term: type 2 vestibular sensory cell of epithelium of crista of ampulla of semicircular duct of membranous labyrinth
desc: A type II vestibular sensory cell that is part of the epithelium of crista of ampulla of semicircular duct of membranous labyrinth.

term: melanocyte of eyelid
desc: A melanocyte that is part of the eyelid.

term: myoepithelial cell of intralobular lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the intralobular part of terminal lactiferous duct.

term: endothelial cell of venous sinus of red pulp of spleen
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the venous sinus of red pulp of spleen.

term: endothelial cell of hepatic sinusoid
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the hepatic sinusoid.

term: epithelial cell of appendix
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the appendix.

term: myocyte of sinoatrial node
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the sinoatrial node.

term: myocyte of atrioventricular node
desc: A muscle cell that is part of the atrioventricular node.

term: endothelial cell of Peyer's patch
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the small intestine Peyer's patch.

term: endothelial cell of arteriole
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the arteriole.

term: endothelial cell of artery
desc: A blood vessel endothelial cell that is part of an arterial endothelium.

term: endothelial cell of venule
desc: An endothelial cell that is part of the venule.

term: epithelial cell of gall bladder
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the gallbladder.

term: myoepithelial cell of lactiferous gland
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the mammary gland.

term: myoepithelial cell of sweat gland
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the sweat gland.

term: myoepithelial cell of lactiferous alveolus
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the mammary gland alveolus.

term: myoepithelial cell of lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the lactiferous duct.

term: myoepithelial cell of terminal lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the terminal lactiferous duct.

term: chromaffin cell of paraaortic body
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the paraaortic body.

term: chromaffin cell of paraganglion
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the paraganglion.

term: chromaffin cell of adrenal gland
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the adrenal gland.

term: adrenal cortex chromaffin cell
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the adrenal cortex.

term: stem cell of epidermis
desc: A somatic stem cell that is part of the epidermis.

term: conjunctival epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the conjunctiva.

term: epithelial cell of lacrimal canaliculus
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the lacrimal canaliculus.

term: epithelial cell of external acoustic meatus
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the external acoustic meatus.

term: epithelial cell of lacrimal duct
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the lacrimal duct.

term: epithelial cell of lacrimal sac
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the lacrimal sac.

term: epithelial cell of nasolacrimal duct
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the nasolacrimal duct.

term: epithelial cell of wall of inferior part of anal canal
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the wall of inferior part of anal canal.

term: epithelial cell of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the viscerocranial mucosa.

term: urothelial cell of trigone of urinary bladder
desc: An urothelial cell that is part of the trigone of urinary bladder.

term: ciliary muscle cell
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the ciliary body.

term: mesothelial cell of anterior chamber of eye
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the anterior chamber of eyeball.

term: myoepithelial cell of dilator pupillae
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the dilatator pupillae.

term: epithelial cell of stratum germinativum of esophagus
desc: A basal cell that is part of the epithelium of esophagus.

term: epithelial cell of sweat gland
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the sweat gland.

term: epithelial cell of nephron
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the nephron.

term: epithelial cell of glomerular capsule
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the glomerular capsule.

term: epithelial cell of visceral layer of glomerular capsule
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the visceral layer of glomerular capsule.

term: parietal epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the glomerular parietal epithelium.

term: epithelial cell of intermediate tubule
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the intermediate tubule.

term: kidney collecting duct epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the collecting duct of renal tubule.

term: mesothelial cell of parietal peritoneum
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the parietal peritoneum.

term: mesothelial cell of visceral peritoneum
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the visceral peritoneum.

term: melanocyte of skin
desc: A melanocyte that is part of the skin of body.

term: chromaffin cell of ovary
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the ovary.

term: chromaffin cell of right ovary
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the right ovary.

term: chromaffin cell of left ovary
desc: A chromaffin cell that is part of the left ovary.

term: myoepithelial cell of acinus of lactiferous gland
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the acinus of lactiferous gland.

term: myoepithelial cell of main lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the main lactiferous duct.

term: myoepithelial cell of primary lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the primary lactiferous duct.

term: myoepithelial cell of secondary lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the secondary lactiferous duct.

term: myoepithelial cell of tertiary lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the tertiary lactiferous duct.

term: myoepithelial cell of quarternary lactiferous duct
desc: A myoepithelial cell that is part of the quarternary lactiferous duct.

term: cardiac pacemaker cell of sinoatrial node
desc: A nodal myocyte that is part of the sinoatrial node.

term: transitional myocyte of sinoatrial node
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the sinoatrial node.

term: Purkinje myocyte of atrioventricular node
desc: A Purkinje myocyte that is part of the atrioventricular node.

term: transitional myocyte of internodal tract
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the internodal tract.

term: transitional myocyte of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A transitional myocyte that is part of the atrioventricular bundle.

term: myocardial endocrine cell of interventricular septum
desc: A myocardial endocrine cell that is part of the interventricular septum.

term: Purkinje myocyte of internodal tract
desc: A Purkinje myocyte that is part of the internodal tract.

term: Purkinje myocyte of atrioventricular bundle
desc: A Purkinje myocyte that is part of the atrioventricular bundle.

term: basal cell of urothelium
desc: A basal cell that is part of the urothelium.

term: smooth muscle cell of prostate
desc: A smooth muscle cell that is part of the prostate gland.

term: cholangiocyte
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of the bile duct. Cholangiocytes contribute to bile secretion via net release of bicarbonate and water. They are cuboidal epithelium in the small interlobular bile ducts, but become columnar and mucus secreting in larger bile ducts approaching the porta hepatis and the extrahepatic ducts.

term: reticular cell of splenic cord
desc: A reticular cell that is part of the splenic cord.

term: mesothelial cell of peritoneum
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the peritoneum.

term: mesothelial cell of pleura
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the pleura.

term: mesothelial cell of parietal pleura
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the parietal pleura.

term: mesothelial cell of visceral pleura
desc: A mesothelial cell that is part of the visceral pleura.

term: nephron tubule epithelial cell
desc: An epithelial cell that is part of a nephron tubule.

term: small intestine goblet cell
desc: A goblet cell that is part of the small intestine.

term: kidney cell
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial cell
desc: 

term: kidney medulla cell
desc: 

term: kidney pelvis cell
desc: 

term: kidney tubule cell
desc: 

term: kidney glomerular epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney medulla collecting duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney inner medulla collecting duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney outer medulla collecting duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex collecting duct epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney papillary duct principal epithelial cell
desc: 

term: inner renal cortex cell
desc: 

term: papillary tips cell
desc: 

term: lower urinary tract cell
desc: 

term: ureteral cell
desc: 

term: kidney nerve cell
desc: 

term: kidney corpuscule cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex tubule cell
desc: 

term: kidney outer medulla cell
desc: 

term: kidney inner medulla cell
desc: 

term: juxtaglomerular complex cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex interstitial cell
desc: 

term: kidney medulla interstitial cell
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial myofibroblast
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial fibroblast
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial fibrocyte
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial alternatively activated macrophage
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial inflammatory macrophage
desc: 

term: kidney interstitial suppressor macrophage
desc: 

term: kidney resident macrophage
desc: 

term: kidney resident dendritic cell
desc: 

term: kidney pelvis smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney pelvis urothelial cell
desc: 

term: ureter urothelial cell
desc: 

term: ureter adventitial cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex collecting duct principal cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex collecting duct intercalated cell
desc: 

term: kidney outer medulla collecting duct principal cell
desc: 

term: kidney outer medulla collecting duct intercalated cell
desc: 

term: kidney inner medulla collecting duct principal cell
desc: 

term: kidney inner medulla collecting duct intercalated cell
desc: 

term: kidney papillary duct intercalated cell
desc: 

term: kidney papillary duct principal cell
desc: 

term: glomerular mesangial cell
desc: Intraglomerular mesangial cells are specialized pericytes located among the glomerular capillaries within a renal corpuscle of a kidney.

term: glomerular cell
desc: 

term: kidney connecting tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney inner medulla interstitial cell
desc: 

term: kidney outer medulla interstitial cell
desc: 

term: kidney proximal convoluted tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney proximal straight tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney distal convoluted tubule epithelial cell
desc: 

term: macula densa epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney blood vessel cell
desc: 

term: kidney arterial blood vessel cell
desc: 

term: kidney capillary endothelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney venous blood vessel cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle epithelial cell
desc: 

term: ureter smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: glomerular capillary endothelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney afferent arteriole cell
desc: 

term: kidney efferent arteriole cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle ascending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle descending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: peritubular capillary endothelial cell
desc: 

term: vasa recta cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex artery cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex vein cell
desc: 

term: kidney artery smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney arteriole smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney venous system smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney afferent arteriole endothelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney afferent arteriole smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney efferent arteriole endothelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney efferent arteriole smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle thick ascending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle thin ascending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle medullary thick ascending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle cortical thick ascending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney loop of Henle thin descending limb epithelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney outer medulla peritubular capillary cell
desc: 

term: kidney cortex peritubular capillary cell
desc: 

term: inner renal medulla vasa recta cell
desc: 

term: outer renal medulla vasa recta cell
desc: 

term: vasa recta ascending limb cell
desc: 

term: arcuate artery cell
desc: 

term: interlobular artery cell
desc: 

term: arcuate vein cell
desc: 

term: interlobular vein cell
desc: 

term: inner medulla vasa recta ascending limb cell
desc: 

term: outer medulla vasa recta ascending limb cell
desc: 

term: arcuate artery endothelial cell
desc: 

term: arcuate artery smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: interlobulary artery endothelial cell
desc: 

term: interlobulary artery smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: arcuate vein endothelial cell
desc: 

term: arcuate vein smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: interlobulary vein endothelial cell
desc: 

term: interlobulary vein smooth muscle cell
desc: 

term: kidney collecting duct cell
desc: 

term: vasa recta descending limb cell
desc: 

term: inner medulla vasa recta descending limb cell
desc: 

term: outer medulla vasa recta descending limb cell
desc: 

term: renal interstitial pericyte
desc: 

term: bladder cell
desc: 

term: urethra cell
desc: 

term: bladder urothelial cell
desc: 

term: urethra urothelial cell
desc: 

term: kidney collecting duct principal cell
desc: 

term: kidney collecting duct intercalated cell
desc: 

term: epithelial cell of exocrine pancreas
desc: An epithelial cell of the exocrine pancreas.

term: olfactory bulb interneuron
desc: A neuron residing in the olfactory bulb that serve to process and refine signals arising from olfactory sensory neurons

term: periglomerular cell
desc: the small neuron in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb whose dendrites arborize within a glomerulus, where it receives synaptic input from olfactory receptor cell axon terminals, and also engages in dendrodendritic interactions with mitral and tufted cell dendrites; uses both GABA and dopamine as a neurotransmitter

term: hair-tylotrich neuron
desc: the subcutaneous mechanoreceptors that innervate tylotrich hair follicles

term: hair-down neuron
desc: the subcutaneous mechanoreceptors that innervate vellus hairs

term: sensory neuron of dorsal root ganglion
desc: A sensory neuron of the dorsal root ganglia that senses body position and sends information about how much the muscle is stretched to the spinal cord.

term: medium spiny neuron
desc: the inhibitory projection neurons located in the striatum that integrate glutamatergic signals arising from the cerebral cortex and thalamus

term: mitral cell
desc: the large glutaminergic nerve cells whose dendrites synapse with axons of the olfactory receptor neurons in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb, and whose axons pass centrally in the olfactory tract to the olfactory cortex

term: olfactory bulb tufted cell
desc: the principal glutaminergic neuron located in the outer third of the external plexiform layer of the olfactory bulb; a single short primary dendrite traverses the outer external plexiform layer and terminates within an olfactory glomerulus in a tuft of branches, where it receives the input from olfactory receptor neuron axon terminals; axons of the tufted cells transfer information to a number of areas in the brain, including the piriform cortex, entorhinal cortex, olfactory tubercle, and amygdala

term: parvocellular neurosecretory cell
desc: the secretory neurons of the paraventricular nucleus that synthesize and secrete vasopressin, corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) and thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) into blood vessels in the hypothalamo-pituitary portal system

term: glycinergic neuron
desc: the neurons that utilize glycine as a neurotransmitter

term: intestinal enteroendocrine cell
desc: the various hormone- or neurotransmitter-secreting cells present throughout the mucosa of the intestinal tract

term: stomach enteroendocrine cell
desc: the various hormone- or neurotransmitter-secreting cells present throughout the mucosa of the stomach

term: vomeronasal sensory neuron
desc: chemosensitive cells that innervate the vomernasal organ epithelium and are responsible for receiving and transmitting pheromone signals

term: bronchioalveolar stem cells
desc: a respiratory stem cell found at the junction of the terminal (conductive) bronchiole and the respiratory bronchiole, which gives rise to alveolar cell types and Clara cells in response to lung injury.

term: lung endothelial cell
desc: 

term: pulmonary artery endothelial cell
desc: 

term: hippocampal interneuron
desc: An interneuron of the hippocampus.

term: hippocampal pyramidal neuron
desc: A pyramidal neuron of the hippocampus.

term: colon endothelial cell
desc: Vascular endothelium found in colon blood vessels.

term: nasopharyngeal epithelial cell
desc: Cell of the nasopharyngeal epithelium.

term: uterine cervix squamous cell
desc: Squamous cell of uterine cervix epithelium.

term: oral mucosa squamous cell
desc: Squamous cell of oral epithelium.

term: tonsil squamous cell
desc: Squamous cell of tonsil epithelium.

term: vagina squamous cell
desc: Squamous cell of vaginal epithelium.

term: cerebral cortex glial cell
desc: Glial cell of cerebral cortex.

term: hippocampus glial cell
desc: Glial cell of hippocampus.

term: lateral ventricle glial cell
desc: Glial cell of lateral ventricle.

term: lateral ventricle neuron
desc: Neuron of lateral ventricle.

term: obsolete breast adipocyte
desc: OBSOLETE: Adipocytes found in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of breast. The breast consists of three main components, the skin, the subcutaneous adipose tissue and the functional glandular tissue that comprises both parenchyma and stroma.

term: appendix glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of appendix epithelium. Example: Goblet cells; enterocytes or absorptive cells; enteroendocrine and M cells.

term: mammary gland glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of mammary epithelium. Example: glandular cells of large and intermediate ducts, glandular cells in terminal ducts.

term: uterine cervix glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of uterine cervix epithelium.

term: colon glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of colon epithelium. Example: Goblet cells; enterocytes or absorptive cells; enteroendocrine and M cells.

term: duodenum glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of duodenal epithelium. Example: Enterocytes, Goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells; Paneth cells; M cells; Brunner's gland cell.

term: epididymis glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of epididymal epithelium.

term: oviduct glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of oviduct epithelium. Example: peg cells, ciliated cells.

term: gall bladder glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of gall bladder epithelium.

term: parathyroid glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of parathyroid epithelium. Example: Parathyroid chief cell and parathyroid oxyphil cells.

term: rectum glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of rectal epithelium. Example: Goblet cell; enterocytes or absorptive cells; enteroendocrine and M cells.

term: salivary gland glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of salivary gland. Example: Serous cells, mucous cells, cuboidal epithelial cells of the intercalated ducts, simple cuboidal epithelium of the striated ducts, epithelial cells of excretory ducts.

term: seminal vesicle glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of seminal vesicle epithelium.

term: small intestine glandular cell
desc: A glandular cell found in the epithelium of the small intestine. Example: Enterocytes, Goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells; Paneth cells; M cells; Somatostatin-secreting Cells (D-cells) .

term: pancreas exocrine glandular cell
desc: Glandular cell of exocrine pancreas epithelium. Example: pancreatic acinar cell, glandular cells in pancreatic canaliculi, glandular cells in pancreatic ducts.

term: adrenal gland glandular cell
desc: Hormone secreting cell located in the cortex of adrenal gland. Glandular cells in the adrenal cortex secrete mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids and androgens.

term: cerebral cortex endothelial cell
desc: Endothelial cells forming the walls of the capillaries within the cerebral cortex.

term: lung macrophage
desc: Circulating macrophages and tissue macrophages (alveolar macrophages) of lung.

term: foreskin keratinocyte
desc: Keratinocyte from foreskin.

term: articular chondrocyte
desc: Chondrocyte forming the hyaline cartilage found in joints.

term: foreskin fibroblast
desc: Fibroblast from foreskin.

term: muscle fibroblast
desc: Fibroblast from muscle organ.

term: bone marrow hematopoietic cell
desc: Hematopoietic cells resident in the bone marrow. Include: hematopoietic stem cells (lymphoid stem cells and myeloid stem cells) and the precursor cells for thrombocytes, erythrocytes, basophils, neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes and lymphocytes.

term: cerebellar neuron
desc: Neuron of the cerebellum.

term: epidermal melanocyte
desc: Any melanocyte that is part of a epidermis.

term: peripheral blood mononuclear cell
desc: A leukocyte with a single non-segmented nucleus in the mature form found in the circulatory pool of blood.

term: decidua cell
desc: Any native cell that is part of a decidua.

term: pituitary gland cell
desc: Any cell that is part of a pituitary gland.

term: brain macroglial cell
desc: Any macroglial cell that is part of a brain.

term: tonsil germinal center B cell
desc: Any germinal center B cell that is part of a tonsil.

term: articular chondrocyte of knee joint
desc: Chondrocyte forming the hyaline cartilage found in the knee joint.

term: microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any blood vessel endothelial cell that is part of a microvascular endothelium.

term: obsolete microvascular endothelium blood vessel endothelial cell
desc: Any blood vessel endothelial cell that is part of a microvascular endothelium.

term: dermis blood vessel endothelial cell
desc: Any blood vessel endothelial cell that is part of a dermis.

term: dermis lymphatic vessel endothelial cell
desc: Any endothelial cell of lymphatic vessel that is part of a dermis.

term: fibroblast of pedal digit skin
desc: Any skin fibroblast that is part of a pedal digit skin.

term: fibroblast of skin of abdomen
desc: Any skin fibroblast that is part of a skin of abdomen.

term: fibroblast of upper leg skin
desc: Any skin fibroblast that is part of a upper leg skin.

term: fibroblast of arm
desc: Any skin fibroblast that is part of a arm.

term: lung microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any lung endothelial cell that is part of a microvascular endothelium.

term: fibroblast of peridontal ligament
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a periodontal ligament.

term: endothelial cell of coronary artery
desc: Any endothelial cell of artery that is part of a coronary artery.

term: compound eye photoreceptor cell
desc: Any photoreceptor cell that is part of a compound eye.

term: inner cell mass native cell
desc: Any native cell that is part of a inner cell mass.

term: sebaceous gland native cell
desc: Any native cell that is part of a sebaceous gland.

term: cardiac septum native cell
desc: Any native cell that is part of a cardiac septum.

term: spinal cord ventral column interneuron
desc: Any interneuron that is part of a spinal cord ventral column.

term: spinal cord medial motor column neuron
desc: Any neuron that is part of a spinal cord medial motor column.

term: spinal cord oligodendrocyte
desc: Any oligodendrocyte that is part of a spinal cord.

term: obsolete cerebellum Golgi cell
desc: Any Golgi cell that is part of a cerebellum.

term: cerebellum basket cell
desc: Any basket cell that is part of a cerebellum.

term: cerebellum glutamatergic neuron
desc: Any glutamatergic neuron that is part of a cerebellum.

term: central nervous system neuron
desc: Any neuron that is part of a central nervous system.

term: hypothalamus native cell
desc: Any native cell that is part of a hypothalamus.

term: lateral line ganglion neuron
desc: Any neuron that is part of a lateral line ganglion.

term: peripheral nervous system neuron
desc: Any neuron that is part of a peripheral nervous system.

term: limb basal cell of epidermis
desc: Any basal cell of epidermis that is part of a limb.

term: anterior lateral line neuromast hair cell
desc: Any neuromast hair cell that is part of a anterior lateral line.

term: anterior lateral line neuromast mantle cell
desc: Any neuromast mantle cell that is part of a anterior lateral line.

term: anterior lateral line neuromast support cell
desc: Any neuromast support cell that is part of a anterior lateral line.

term: posterior lateral line neuromast hair cell
desc: Any neuromast hair cell that is part of a posterior lateral line.

term: posterior lateral line neuromast mantle cell
desc: Any neuromast mantle cell that is part of a posterior lateral line.

term: posterior lateral line neuromast support cell
desc: Any neuromast support cell that is part of a posterior lateral line.

term: bladder microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a urinary bladder.

term: dermis microvascular lymphatic vessel endothelial cell
desc: Any dermis lymphatic vessel endothelial cell that is part of a microvascular endothelium.

term: embryonic fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a embryo.

term: brain pericyte
desc: Any pericyte cell that is part of a brain.

term: brain microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a brain.

term: foreskin melanocyte
desc: Any melanocyte that is part of a prepuce of penis.

term: ventricular cardiac muscle cell
desc: Any cardiac muscle cell that is part of a cardiac ventricle.

term: brainstem motor neuron
desc: Any motor neuron that is part of a brainstem.

term: ventral horn of spinal cord spinal cord motor neuron
desc: Any spinal cord motor neuron that is part of a ventral horn of spinal cord.

term: primary motor cortex pyramidal cell
desc: Any pyramidal cell that is part of a primary motor cortex.

term: obsolete retina retinal ganglion cell
desc: Any retinal ganglion cell that is part of a retina.

term: splenic fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a spleen.

term: umbilical artery endothelial cell
desc: Any endothelial cell of artery that is part of a umbilical cord.

term: splenic endothelial cell
desc: Any endothelial cell that is part of a spleen.

term: hepatic pit cell
desc: A large, granular, liver specific natural killer cell that adheres to the endothelial cells of the hepatic sinusoid.

term: liver dendritic cell
desc: Any dendritic cell that is part of a liver.

term: Meynert cell
desc: Any pyramidal cell that is part of a regional part of cerebral cortex.

term: femural osteoblast
desc: Any osteoblast that is part of a femur.

term: calvarial osteoblast
desc: Any osteoblast that is part of a skull.

term: prostate gland microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a prostate gland.

term: placental villous trophoblast
desc: Any trophoblast cell that is part of a placenta.

term: placental amniotic mesenchymal stromal cell
desc: Any mesenchymal stem cell that is part of a placenta.

term: placental villus capillary endothelial cell
desc: Any capillary endothelial cell that is part of a placenta.

term: ovarian fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a female gonad.

term: ovarian surface epithelial cell
desc: Any epithelial cell that is part of a female gonad.

term: ovarian microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a female urethra.

term: cardiac ventricle fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a cardiac ventricle.

term: cardiac atrium fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a cardiac atrium.

term: pericardium fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a pericardium.

term: gallbladder fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a gallbladder.

term: optic choroid fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a optic choroid.

term: mammary microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a breast.

term: adipose microvascular endothelial cell
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a adipose tissue.

term: migratory cardiac neural crest cell
desc: Any migratory neural crest cell that is part of a cardiac neural crest.

term: splenocyte
desc: Any leukocyte that is part of a spleen.

term: anterior visceral endoderm cell
desc: Any endodermal cell that is part of a anterior visceral endoderm.

term: hindlimb stylopod vein endothelial cell
desc: Any vein endothelial cell that is part of a hindlimb stylopod.

term: skeletal muscle tissue of pectoralis major striated muscle cell
desc: Any striated muscle cell that is part of a skeletal muscle tissue of pectoralis major.

term: placental pericyte
desc: Any pericyte cell that is part of a placenta.

term: mesenchymal stem cell of femoral bone marrow
desc: Any mesenchymal stem cell of the bone marrow that is part of a femur.

term: mesenchymal stem cell of abdominal adipose
desc: Any mesenchymal stem cell of adipose that is part of a abdomen.

term: melanocyte of skin of face
desc: Any melanocyte of skin that is part of a skin of face.

term: melanocyte of foreskin
desc: Any melanocyte of skin that is part of a skin of prepuce of penis.

term: hair follicle dermal papilla cell of scalp
desc: Any hair follicle dermal papilla cell that is part of a scalp.

term: conjunctiva goblet cell
desc: Any goblet cell that is part of a conjunctiva.

term: mononuclear cell of umbilical cord
desc: Any mononuclear cell that is part of a umbilical cord.

term: neocortex basket cell
desc: Any basket cell that is part of a neocortex.

term: dentate gyrus of hippocampal formation basket cell
desc: Any basket cell that is part of a dentate gyrus of hippocampal formation.

term: Ammon's horn basket cell
desc: Any basket cell that is part of a Ammon's horn.

term: dentate gyrus of hippocampal formation granule cell
desc: The principal cell type of the dentate gyrus.

term: dentate gyrus of hippocampal formation stellate cell
desc: Any stellate cell that is part of a dentate gyrus of hippocampal formation.

term: endometrial microvascular endothelial cells
desc: Any microvascular endothelial cell that is part of a endometrial blood vessel.

term: hair follicular keratinocyte
desc: Any keratinocyte that is part of a hair follicle.

term: bronchus fibroblast of lung
desc: Any fibroblast of lung that is part of a bronchus.

term: nasal cavity respiratory epithelium epithelial cell of viscerocranial mucosa
desc: Any epithelial cell of viscerocranial mucosa that is part of a nasal cavity respiratory epithelium.

term: cord blood hematopoietic stem cell
desc: Any hematopoietic stem cell that is part of a umbilical cord blood.

term: reticular layer of dermis fibroblast
desc: Any fibroblast that is part of a reticular layer of dermis.

term: midbrain dopaminergic neuron
desc: Any dopaminergic neuron that is part of a midbrain.

